{"datetime": "2018-10-03T07:34:43+05:30"}
BENGALURU: A labourer and a homemaker have filed separate complaints with the health department against a Davanagere private hospital for allegedly giving them false HIV-positive reports. They claim the revelation turned their lives upside down, causing them mental agony and pushing them into depression. 

Halappa KB, 60, and Sushmitha, 21, are residents of Davanagere. Halappa, a labourer, got admitted to City Central Hospital in December 2017 for acute leg pain, followed by blockage in his veins. He alleged that no consent was taken from him for the HIV test nor was he informed while his blood was being drawn. His son Raju H is now running from pillar to post seeking justice and has complained to the consumer court as well, claiming that his father had to face stigma due to the false positive reports.

“The hospital conducted an HIV test without our knowledge and consent. It claimed that the report was positive and refused to conduct cardiac surgery on my father. He slipped into depression and even attempted suicide. We brought him to a private hospital in Bengaluru and got him tested for HIV. But the report was negative and he even underwent the operation. My complaint to the health department has been ignored and justice has been delayed,” Raju told TOI. 

Sushmitha had visited the Davanagere hospital in March for a prenatal check-up when she was five months pregnant. “The blood test was done on March 23. But they asked us to collect the report after three days. We were shocked with the findings — they showed she was HIV-positive — and underwent stress and psychological trauma,” said her husband Prahlad S, a police constable.

The couple then went to the government-run Integrated Counselling and Testing Centre for HIV testing. Till then, they had no idea that the report issued by the private hospital was false. “ICTC’s report revealed Sushmitha was not HIV-positive, which came as a huge relief. But the private hospital was firm on its stand. If they had a doubt, they should have conducted another test,” said Prahlad. Sushmitha’s medical negligence complaint with the health department is pending inquiry. Prahlad added that the hospital didn’t even bother to counsel them when they were traumatised after seeing the report.

Dr Raghavan GD, district HIV/AIDS control officer, Davanagere, said he was asked by the district health officer to inquire into both the complaints. “In Halappa’s case, the inquiry report has been submitted to the government, but the findings can’t be disclosed. In the other case, the inquiry is yet to begin,” he said.


Cases pending before court: Hospital

When TOI contacted the hospital authorities, they refused to comment but neither denied nor admitted to the allegations. “The cases are pending before the consumer court. At this stage, we can’t comment on the complaints. We have cooperated with the health department for the inquiry,” said Padmanabh UR, administrator, City Central Hospital.


‘Negligence cases not under KPME Act’
In 2017, the state witnessed a series of protests by doctors when the government initiated amendments to the Karnataka Private Medical Establishment (KPME) Act to regulate private medical establishments. Though the amendments were made, they were called the watered-down version of those intended. In the two cases, the patients have sought action under the KPME Act. “But the Act authorises us only to check and take measures if a hospital/clinic is functioning without registration. Medical negligence cases don’t come under it,” said Dr Raghavan GD, district HIV/AIDS control officer, Davanagere. 


