{"datetime": "2018-08-04T22:48:40+05:30"}
LUDHIANA: 38 youth from several villages of Ludhiana have shunned drugs and are now leading a normal life. Some of them have even started working hard and doing jobs, which has given a new lease of life for their families. Ludhiana MP Ravneet Singh Bittu who has been constantly campaigning against drugs usage in the district on Saturday visited the families of some of the former drug addicts at village Madarpura of the district. The family members of these former drug addicts thanked MP Bittu for his efforts.


One such former drug addict named Hardeep Singh informed that he was addicted to “chitta” for the last few years. He said that when he was a drug addict, he never woke up before 10am and hardly did any work. But now that he has shunned drugs, he has started working as a driver for a vegetable seller. “Now I wake up at 4am daily, go to the nearby vegetable Mandi and am happy leading a normal life,” an elated Hardeep said.

Another such former drug addict named Simranpreet Singh said that he feels so relaxed and wants to emerge as an example for other youth that leaving drugs is an easy task, provided one is firm enough to do so. His octogenarian grandmother Naseeb Kaur also thanked the MP and said that as his grandson has shunned drugs, this fact has now added few more years to her life.

Some time back, 38 youth from villages such as Jangpur, Dakha, Mullanpur, Swaddi, Madarpura, Salempur, Tibba, Abbupura, Malsian and some others, were admitted at a drug de-addiction centre. MP Ravneet Singh Bittu informed that these boys stayed at the drug de-addiction centre for a few days and are now leading a normal and healthy life. He said that the treatment provided to them was totally free of cost by the state government. He also lauded the efforts of Manjinder Singh Khaira, a resident of village Abbupura, who has adopted 5 such youth and is ensuring that they not only shun drugs but also stay away from them forever. He informed that the youth who are suffering from either AIDS or Hepatitis C would be provided treatment totally free of cost by the state government.

Later addressing a rally against drugs at village Kular, Ravneet Singh Bittu urged everyone to stay away from drugs and said that all people should join this war against drugs. He said that people should adopt drug addicts from their villages and should take them to nearby drug de-addiction centres for treatment. He also warned the drug smugglers to mend their ways else they would face strict action.

