{"datetime": "2018-02-08T13:43:08+05:30"}
BANGARMAU (UNNAO): Police on Wednesday arrested the quack who has been accused of infecting at least 58 people with HIV in Bangarmau tehsil of Unnao district by allegedly using the infected syringe and needles.

Police identified the accused as Rajendra Yadav, a native of Shiv Baksh Kheda of Unnao district. Investigations revealed that he had studied only up to Class XII and worked at a BAMS doctor’s dispensary as a helper before opening his own make-shift clinic on station road area in Bangarmau.

"He has been booked under sections 269 (negligent act likely to spread infection of disease deadly to life) and 308 (culpable homicide) of the Indian Penal Code and section 15(3) of the Indian Medical Council Act. Yadav was arrested from the house of his relative where he was taking shelter," Bangarmau Kotwali police station inspector Arun Pratap Singh told TOI.

Yadav was arrested based on a complaint filed by chief medical superintendent of Community Health Centre, Bangarmau, PK Dohre after 25 locals including two kids tested positive for HIV. They all claimed to have undergone treatment at Yadav’s clinic.

According to police, majority of affected people suffering from fever or any other common disease approached him. He administered them medicine and also injected them with used syringes and needles. However, condition of many deteriorated further and finally they contracted the deadly disease.

"We are investigating the syringe infection theory as the virus doesn’t last long in the needle. Also, he was giving intra-muscular shots and not intravenous shots for it to spread the way it has spread," said the chief medical officer (CMO), SP Chowdhary.

"The area criss-crosses several highways, and chances that the truck drivers indulged in unprotected sex and spread the deadly disease," he added.

 prevent HIV transmission to others,” said Dr Margaret Chan, director-general, WHO. 

In 2015, the total number of people living with HIV in India were estimated at 21.17 lakh, whereas 86,000 new HIV cases were found.

