{"datetime": "2017-12-02T12:25:43+05:30"}
KANNUR: Kannur district panchayat and the Health Department will organise yearlong HIV-AIDS awareness campaign among the youths and also the educational institutions in the district.

Announcing this after inaugurating the district-level functions as part of the World AIDS Day here on Friday, district panchayat president K V Sumesh said though the number of people getting HIV infection has come down considerably, it is a matter of concern that nearly 100 new cases of HIV infection are reported in the State.

"The tendency to ostracize HIV infected people should be jointly resisted and we are not human beings if we fail to show empathy to those who got the diseases in some unfortunate circumstances," said Sumesh. "It is not good for the civilised society to ostracize the HIV-affected people, and we should keep in mind that the patients are the responsibility of the society as well", he further added.

"We should have the mind to convince the infected people that they have the support of the society, and the health of every single person is important to the society," he said.

District collector Mir Muhammed Ali, who was the chief guest on the occasion, said if we are ready to educate ourselves and also instill awareness among the people, it will bear results. The collector referred to the success of the Measles-Rubella vaccination campaign in this connection.

According to the officials, there are 1709 people who have the infection in Kannur whereas it is 1424 in Kasaragod. In Kozhikode, there 4614 confirmed cases while in Wayanad it is 283 and in Malappuram 606. However, the data need not exactly be the number of patients from that district only, especially in the districts where there are medical colleges, because in the earlier times the facility for HIV test was available only in medical colleges, according to the officials.

 their family members.“The prospective grooms and brides have freedom to choose their partners as they walk on stage and talk about themselves. Once the groom and bride like each other, the next stage will be to consult their parents or relatives besides mutual consent,” Patel said. She said for the first time female participants in the marriage mela will be reimbursed all their travelling and other expenses with the help of Reliance Foundation. 