{"datetime": "2017-12-06T08:21:56+05:30"}
LUDHIANA: A 22-year-old HIV-positive youth went on a hunger strike at civil hospital on Tuesday morning after being “denied treatment for five days”. Soon, other HIV-positive patients, too, joined him to protest against the hospital staff.

Talking to the TOI, the youth said, “I had recently got an implant in my left leg, which was giving some trouble. When I went to Dr Davinder, orthopaedic surgeon of civil hospital, he refused to admit and treat me. He asked me to go back to my hometown in UP from where I got the implant.”

Dr US Sooch, district programme officer, HIV/ Aids prevention, said, “The patient came to me with a complaint and I told Dr Davinder to admit him. The patient also gave a complaint to Dr Meenu Singh, deputy director, Punjab State Aids Control Society. But he was not admitted.”

“It was only after I went on a hunger strike and an NGO, Dr Kotinis, offered help that the hospital admitted me,” the youth added. Dr Inderjit from NGO Dr Kotinis said, “The HIV-positive patient has been complaining for the past five days that he is being denied treatment. Left with no option, he went on a hunger strike and didn’t even take his HIV medicine. Then, the senior medical officer came and the patient was admitted. Many other HIV patients joined him in his protest and complained about doctors and nurses’ misbehaviour.”

The protest, which started at 10am, was called off at 2pm. While refuting the allegations, senior medical officer (SMO) Dr Kulwinder Singh said, “Dr Davinder gave him antibiotics for five days, and he was asked to come for further treatment after the dose. We had asked the patient for his medical records. As he could not give the records, he was asked to take treatment from the doctor who did the implant.

“He was never denied treatment. Every day so many HIV and hepatitis-C patients are treated, why will he be denied treatment? Moreover, he was checked in OPD and given antibiotics. But the patient wanted to be admitted, but we can’t do that unnecessarily.”

