{"datetime": "2018-07-05T14:51:52+05:30"}
LUDHIANA: The 90% of injecting drug users (IDU) are always at high risk of getting infected with Hepatitis C and even have chances of becoming HIV positive. The doctors treating the drug addicts at the Opioid Substitution Therapy (OST) centre at civil hospital claimed that they have been treating IDUs since 2010, and they conduct blood tests of these patients at regular intervals of 6 months for keeping a tab on their diseases. If Hepatitis C is not treated properly, it can convert to liver cancer which can prove fatal.


According to available data of tests being conducted at this centre, out of 416 drug addicts, 358 were found suffering from Hepatitis C in the past six months. In this way, around 86% of the addicts were found suffering from this disease. The addicts get treated in three-month course of medicine at this centre. 

Similarly, they are prone to get infected HIV, that can later on, lead into AIDS. Though the officials refused to give exact data on HIV+ patients, they shared that 10% of the patients are at the risk of carrying this infection because they use ‘used’ syringes. 

The in-charge at the OST centre Dr S S Dhir said drug addicts basically suffer from a chronic manageable relapsing disorder and in this centre, they are told to keep regular check on their health. He said they conduct the tests after every six months and do a follow-up so that the patients do not suffer from any major health issue. Dr Dhir further elaborated that drug addicts also suffer from malnutrition, sexually-transmitted diseases and seizures. “We have to deal with them sympathetically so that they get treatment,” he said.

Notably, the centre is functional since August 2010 under National Aids Control Organisation (NACO), where addicts and their family members get counselling sessions and at the integrated care centre, tests are conducted on the patients. The basic purpose of this centre is to give addicts medicines orally, so that they should stay away from injections because those are more harmful.


