{"datetime": "2018-06-13T08:26:06+05:30"}
BENGALURU: Aadhaar has been made mandatory for those TB patients drawing nutritional aid of Rs 500 per month during their course of treatment. In order to streamline direct benefit transfer (DBT) where money is credited to the beneficiary’s account, the state government has sought Aadhaar card and bank account details of the patients.


Dr Ramachandra Bairy, deputy director, TB control programme, health and family welfare department, said 83,000 patients in Karnataka have benefited from the scheme in 2017-18 and this year.

“We aim to cover 90,000 TB patients in the current year. Once a patient is tested positive for TB, his/her Aadhaar number and bank account details are collected and updated in the system. The Rs 500 per month provided for nutritional aid directly goes to the patient. For a new case, it is given for six months which is the treatment period. For retreatment of old cases, aid is given for eight months. For those suffering from drug-resistant TB, the money is credited as long as they are under treatment,” he said.

The health ministry directives mention that the state government should make special arrangements for bedridden, differently abled and senior citizens to get enrolled for Aadhaar in case if they haven’t. “If the patient hasn’t enrolled, the onus is on state governments to make sure s/ he gets enrolled within six months of the treatment period,” said Dr Bairy.

On May 29, 2018, the Union ministry of Ayush issued a memorandum to all state governments on use of Aadhaar in benefit schemes and also explained how to handle exceptions. But activists working closely with HIV patients, most of whom also suffer from TB, say the monetary benefits are yet to reach them.

“Aadhaar has been made mandatory everywhere, even to receive the crucial anti-retro viral therapy (ART). Tuberculosis affects many HIV patients and left with no other choice, they have given their Aadhaar card details to the government. But we are yet to hear from members about receiving Rs 500 per month as nutrition supplement,” said Chandrika, outreach worker, Milana, a family support network of people suffering from HIV/AIDS.

