{"datetime": "2017-10-06T07:08:20+05:30"}
HYDERABAD: A 27-year-old woman with full-blown AIDS committed suicide by hanging on Osmania General Hospital premises on Thursday , amid allegations by her family about medical negligence. The victim was a tea vendor from Yousufguda. The victim's first husband died several years ago and her second husband, from whom she contracted HIV, deserted her four years ago. “After her second husband deserted her, she was staying with one Raju at Yousufguda," Afzalgunj inspector P Gnaneder Reddy said.

On September 26, the woman was admitted to Osmania Hospital with severe stomach pain, police said. “Doctors detected she was in advanced stage of AIDS. After treating her for stomach pain, they discharged her on September 29. She again returned to OGH on October 2 with pain. She was accompanied by her sister, who was told by doctors about her deteriorating condition. She was treated at the outpatient wing. She along with her sister stayed put in the waiting hall for the night," the inspector said.

Around 12.15 am, she spoke to her sister at length, requesting her to take care of her daughter. After her sister fell asleep, she went to an abandoned shed behind the OP Block and committed suicide by hanging herself from a pipe with a sari, the inspector said. Though there were allegations from her family that the AIDS-afflicted woman ended her life as she was not admitted as an in-patient, police said there was no such complaint. “On Wednesday night, doctors asked her to come back for review on October 9. Since the auto fare will be high at night, family members decided to wait till morning at the hospital. In the interim period, the woman ended her life.In the complaint, there was no allegation against hospital staff," the inspector said.

Police registered a case under section 174 (suspicious death) of CrPC and doctors, who performed the autopsy , said she died due to hanging.

OGH superintendent Dr GVS Murthy refuted the allegations by her family, saying there was no question of treatment being denied. “We have been giving advanced treatment and even complex surgeries are performed on HIVAIDS patients. Although, I have not gone through medical records of the particular patient, it's false that we denied treatment to any HIV patient. Currently, police is investigating the case. They will declare the findings," he said.

