{"datetime": "2018-08-27T09:34:33+05:30"}
HYDERABAD: Even as bio-medical waste in Hyderabad is increasing every year, efficient handling of toxic stockpile remains a challenge for healthcare facilities and Pollution Control Board (PCB).

Environmental activists say that many healthcare centres that produce large quantities of bio-medical waste either dump it in open spaces or burn it at open dumpsites.

Realising that these methods pose serious risks and can cause both health and environmental hazards, the Pollution Control Board (PCB) has indigenously developed eco-friendly ways to safely segregate and dispose all the hazardous waste.




Segregation of waste in colour-coded paddle-operated covered bins is one of the most effective ways that PCB has introduced, and it also provides training to paramedical staff and waste handlers to segregate and discard all infectious, non-infectious, bio-degradable and re-cyclable material.

N Raveendher, former environmental scientist with the Pollution Control Board said, “In most of the health care centres, the fault lies with hospital authorities and waste handlers. They simply do not follow the rules even after repeated warnings.”

Dr P Surya, who runs a private clinic at Nagole says, “The main things that have to be disposed in clinics are syringes, as no amount of boiling can kill some viruses like HIV. A simple incinerator machine costing a few hundred rupees does the trick, but a majority of them just don’t use it.”

The tip of the syringe is put into a slot in the incinerator which burns it off and then the glass body of the syringe is sterilised, then smashed and disposed of as regular municipal waste as it becomes harmless. However, a lot of the smaller private clinics as well as nursing homes are known to throw their needles along with regular waste.

According to experts, the situation is mostly due to lack of awareness. A few healthcare centres have started segregating and incinerating their waste but there is still a long way to go.

