{"datetime": "2018-07-10T08:42:25+05:30"}
BEIJING: Days after the release of the Chinese movie ‘Dying to Survive’, based on the real-life story of a leukaemia patient who smuggled cheap anti-cancer drugs from India for people who could not afford expensive western drugs, the two countries have reached an agreement on reduction of tariffs on the import of Indian medicines, particularly cancer drugs, to China.


“We believe expansion of imports and slashing of tariffs on anti-cancer medicines will usher in great opportunities for India and other countries in the region,” said Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Hua Chunying on Monday. Last May, China lifted tariffs on the import of cancer drugs. But the move did not excite the Indian industry because they need licenses and tendering support from government hospitals to sell the drugs in China. This kind of support was not forthcoming until now. It is not clear if the foreign ministry is referring to the decision last May or this is a new development.

Other details about the extent of tariff cuts and types of anti-cancer drugs and sources of drugs that would be affected were also not immediately available from official sources.It is possible that Beijing will encourage Indian companies to establish manufacturing of anti-cancer drugs, particularly those that are off patents, in China instead of depending on imports. China has allowed some Indian companies to establish production facilities from medicines to covering other diseases but no licence has been given to them for anticancer drug manufacturing.

About 4.3 million people are diagnosed with cancer annually in China, according to a report of the state-run China Central Television. While announcing the agreement, Hua also referred to the film. ‘Dying to Survive’ is based on Lu Yong, a leukaemia patient, was himself inspired by the Oscar-winning film ‘Dallas Buyers Club’, which is also based on a reallife story of an AIDS patient called Ron Woodroof who smuggled unapproved drugs into Texas to treat himself and others. 'Dying to Survive', which was partly shot in Mumbai, opened with a massive $151 million and its total collection by Sunday stood fractionally short of $200 million, according to a popular website tracking movie business.

Between 2006 and 2013, Lu helped hundreds of chronic myeloid leukemia patients buy a generic drug produced in India for around 200 yuan ($30) per month, which claims to be as effective as the foreign drug but costs more than 20,000 yuan (over $3,100) each month. However, it is not yet clear from Monday’s announcement whether China has agreed to grant licence to Indian companies to sell cancer drugs in the Chinese market, which could be a major step. Indian companies cannot legally market their drugs in China as it requires a licence from the country’s food and drug administration.

