{"datetime": "2016-12-22T21:43:33+05:30"}
NOIDA: A 6-year old child was sent to shelter home after his father, aged 40, was found HIV positive on Wednesday. The father and son from West Bengal had recently come to Noida in search of a job.

Satya Prakash, manager FXB Suraksha-Childline, said that the man worked as a mason. “He belongs to a lower middle class family. He fell ill and was admitted in district hospital Noida last week. In the diagnosis, it was found that he was suffering from HIV positive,” he said. The doctors referred him to LNJP Hospital for better medical care.

Kallu, a resident of Khoda Colony, had earlier met the victim and offered accommodation in his house. However, when he came to know that he was suffering from disease, he expressed unwillingness to continue with the favour.

Prakash said that the boy has been sent to a shelter home after presenting before the child welfare committee. “We will send the boy for a medical test to check if he is safe from the disease. We have come to know that the patient’s wife is pregnant and is based in West Bengal. We will get in touch with her for medical consultation to ensure the baby, when delivered, is safe,” he said.

in Indian databases, but the Pharmatrac database listed only 1,359 brands of these medicines.

The study looked at drugs needed for six common conditions: Artemisinin (for malaria), lamivudine (HIV/AIDS), rifampicin (TB control), oxytocin (reproductive health), fluoxetine (mental health) and metformin (diabetes).

While the diabetes drug was available in 92% of the chemist shops, rifampicin was found in 64.5% of the chemists. The other four were available at less than 50% of the shops. Worse, only a small number of brands dominated the market, suggesting that powerful pharmaceutical companies influenced what is stocked and sold.

Concurring, Dr Abhijit More of the Jan Swasthya Abhiyan said that generic medicines at affordable costs are not easily available across the country.

“There hasn’t been adequate governmental intervention with regard to sales practices by pharmaceutical companies. The Hathi Committee had years back recommended that medicine strips mention the generic names in big and bold print and brand names in smaller print, but this recommendation has not been implemented,” he said. He said pure generic versions of drugs are not available in most cities.

