{"datetime": "2018-09-03T06:48:18+05:30"}
SOLAPUR: Sumana will turn 18 next year, but she looks 10, is four-feet-tall and weighs 30kg. The HIV-positive girl is hearing impaired and her mental ability is that of a child half her age. Like her, at least 60% of the 110 inmates at Solapur’s Palawi-Prabha Hira Pratishthan, the state’s oldest institution caring for children with HIV, suffer from varying degrees of hearing loss. TOI found that the prevalence of height and weight stunting is more than 70%, while over 30% have stymied mental development.


AIDS-related deaths may have dropped by 54% in India over a decade, but most children in rural areas living on antiretroviral therapy (ART) are barely surviving, afflicted by physical and mental deficiencies. The reason: the national programme focuses on medicines instead of a comprehensive medical, nutritional and psychosocial model. For the nearly three lakh registered HIV patients in the state, there are less than 1,000 counsellors, mostly underpaid, and overburdened with administrative work. A fourth of India’s 60,000-odd children taking ART for HIV live in Maharashtra. With no adequate support, the state recently learned that over 30,000 of the two lakh patients on treatment have quietly dropped out.


Stunted, depressed, low on hearing: HIV+ kids face fallout despite drugs

Sumana looks like a 10-year-old though she’s a teenager 11 months shy of 18. Four feet tall and with body weight of 30kg, she is at least 25kg underweight and significantly short for her age. Her mental ability is of a child half her age and she is hearing impaired.

At Solapur’s Palawi-Prabha Hira Pratishthan, one of Maharashtra’s oldest institutions caring for children living with HIV, cases like Sumana’s are not an exception. At least 60% of the 110 children here suffer from varying degrees of hearing loss. The prevalence of height and weight stunting is more than 70%, while over a third have stymied mental development. Besides physical, prevalence of mental health problems such as depression is alarmingly high.

AIDS-related deaths have dropped by 54% and new infections by 66% in India over a decade, but children like Sumana are a testimony to the gaping deficit in the national programme that focuses on drugs instead of a holistic medical, nutritional and psychosocial model that a complex disease such as HIV warrants. A little over a quarter of the 60,000 such children are in Maharashtra.

An otherwise spirited child, Sumant gets drowsy and irritable after taking medicines. “I get severe stomach-ache, dizziness, headache and diarrhoea,'' he says, describing his plight after taking the daily dose of antiretroviral therapy (ART) medicines. Born with the virus, these children need to take two to six capsules daily. For additional infections such as tuberculosis, the pill count could run into double digits. Their very survival depends on following this regimen, but the six-year-old Sumant is among 17 children at the Palawi home who refuse to continue with ART .

“Children go through hell in spite of ART. There is no denying the dramatic shift in HIV care today, but what about those who got the disease at the turn of the century and have spent a lifetime taking medicines. We know little or nothing about what the virus or ART does to each child?” said Palawi's founder, 65-year-old Mangaltai Shah. She says most children in Palawi grapple with problems ranging from skin rashes, oral and vaginal yeast infections, pus accumulation in ears, hearing and vision problems to life-threatening infections such as TB. “So when medicines meant to heal start giving additional trouble, they find it easier to discard.” Moreover, she adds, at Rs 25 per child per day institutions like Palawi neither have adequate funds nor support from government hospitals to tackle the unique health problems of each child.

Sumant is supposed to receive intensive counselling from the local ART centre till his adherence improves, but Shah says the three doctors and four counsellors that cater to 300 HIV patients daily at Solapur Civil Hospital barely have the time to look up. For nearly 3 lakh registered HIV patients in the state, there are less than 1,000 counsellors. Another Palawi resident, four-year-old Khusboo, suffered hearing loss after recurrent ear infections. The diagnosis didn't come from the ART centre, but from her teacher at Palawi’s in-house Gyan Mandir school, who noticed Khusboo was oblivious to classroom activities.

The institution was compelled to start its own school in 2014—a ground-plus-one structure next to the orphanage on Pandharpur’s outskirts—as children are denied admission in regular schools the moment Palawi is mentioned. But it’s a blessing in disguise for these children who struggle to sit through more than one or two classes without dozing off. “A regular school wouldn’t understand or probably tolerate it,” Patil says. Palawi which has been home to 250 HIV-positive children since 2001, has lost 40 to the disease. AIDS claims an average of 2,500 lives in Maharashtra annually; how many are children is not known. The state recently discovered that over 30,000 of the two lakh patients on treatment have dropped out. Here too, paediatric percentage is unclear. On paper, 16,000 children in Maharashtra are on treatment.

Coping is equally challenging for children in the community, who having lost one or both parents to the virus, face vulnerabilities starting from poor access to healthcare and government entitlements to education and nutrition.

Now 17, Palghar native Sachin has been on ART since he was three. He lost his mother at birth and father last December to HIV. He admits to skipping his daily 10-pill regimen. He dropped out of school due to his condition. “The pain would begin after the morning pills. I would cry in class and be compelled to lie down,” said Sachin who can't keep a job either as the medicines make him “drowsy and tired”. At four-feet and grossly underweight at 35kg, Sachin typifies the wasting and stunting associated with HIV.

HIV is a neurotropic virus that not just attacks the immune system but practically affects every organ, resulting in damage to nerve tissues, cognitive development, physical growth, and at the same time causing learning difficulties, speech and language problems. Experts say it’s crucial to monitor toxicity and provide 360-degree healthcare. Dr Ira Shah, an expert in paediatric HIV, says it’s not enough to tell children to take medicines lifelong. “These are toxic drugs given at a much younger age. It is necessary to monitor bone health or metabolic acidosis before the children become intolerant,” she said. In one of her published papers, she wrote about three children who died of neurological complications caused by HIV despite their viral load being suppressed with drugs.

National Aids Control Organisation deputy director Dr R S Gupta admits little is known about how children cope with ART. But he underlines the fact that “they live longer because of the medicines and the average life expectancy now exceeds 20.” There are side-effects, but “what is important is they are alive”. Ironically, Sumant, Khusboo, Sachin are Indian HIV programme's success stories even though they are not thriving but merely surviving.

(Names of all patients have been changed)


