{"datetime": "2017-12-08T11:44:24+05:30"}
Ludhiana: HIV transfer cases from pregnant mother to child have decreased drastically to less than 5%, with awareness and fixed doze combination — a combination of three medicines — given in pregnancy to an HIV-positive mother from the time of diagnosis.

Dr US Sooch, district programme officer of HIV-AIDS prevention, said: “Imparting awareness to mothers to openly discuss their problems with doctors is helping a lot. As such mothers are motivated, they take medicines regularly, and the fixed dose is continued for a lifetime. When a baby is six weeks old, an HIV test is done. If it turns out to be negative, then the test is done again at six months, and again at 18 months if it is negative. If even after 18 months, the test comes out negative again, then the child is declared HIV-free. Now, if the test turns out positive in six weeks, then the medicine (single dose) is started, and after the HIV test at six months, if it is positive again, then a final test is done at 18 months, and if it is positive again, then the medicine is given for a lifetime.” 

Sooch further said that earlier, HIV positive women and children were given a single dose at the time of delivery. But now, the treatment is started in pregnancy itself, if the woman is declared HIV-positive, and the medicine for a pregnant mother is a fixed dose combination, but for a child, the single dose continues as earlier. So, less than 5% cases of transfer of disease from mother to child are found, whereas the rest 95% newborn are all safe. 

CURRENT TREATMENT 

Treatment during pregnancy: One tablet — a combination of three ARV (anti-retro viral) medicines — is given to a pregnant mother at night after meal. Treatment for HIV-positive mother is life-long. 

Test done for child/newborn: First at six weeks, then at six months, and then at 18 months. The medicine, however, is started right from birth itself.

Fall in number of cases: With this new fixed doze combination of medicines, chances of an HIV-positive child being born has come down from 10-20% to less than 5% where mothers took the treatment.


