{"datetime": "2018-07-26T22:39:19+05:30"}
LUCKNOW: Over one crore Indians are carrying the hepatitis C virus infection, according to a review of some 300 studies on the prevalence of the disease in India. Undertaken by the department of gastroenterology, SGPGIMS, which is one of a few select World Health Organisation Collaborating Centres for Viral Hepatitis across the globe, the review revealed that 0.5-1% of the general Indian population carries the hepatitis C virus. Considering the current Indian population of 132 crore, the number translates into a whopping 66 lakh to 1.32 crore persons.


The findings have served as the basis for formulation of the National Viral Hepatitis Control Programme, being rolled out by the Union ministry of health and family welfare on July 28, which is observed every year as the World Hepatitis Day.

The ministry has already formulated the draft operational guidelines as a part of an integrated initiative for prevention and control of viral hepatitis. As per the report, “SGPGIMS undertook a systematic review of available information from published studies and from large unpublished reliable datasets, to assess the prevalence of chronic HCV infection in the Indian population. The data was analysed for quality and to assess the prevalence of overall HCV infections, and by age, sex, risk factors and place in the country.”

Associate Professor, gastroenterology, SGPGI, Dr Amit Goel who conducted the review, said, “The meta-analysis included more than 300 studies representing all states and union territories except Lakshadweep”. He added that around 70% of persons tested positive for hepatitis C blood test needed treatment. Prevalence of hepatitis C in the high-risk groups such as persons living with HIV, those suffering with diseases such as haemophilia, thalassemia was found to be 30-40%.”

Experts at SGPGI point out that over 2,500 patients of hepatitis B and C report to gastroenterology department of SGPGI annually. Specific observations indicate that 10-12% patients report in terminal stages of the disease, where treatments often do not work. This is an irony of sorts as hepatitis C, if diagnosed early, is curable with a 3-month course of available drugs. These drugs are easy to take, safe and also very cheap.

Senior faculty, gastroenterology SGPGI, Prof Rakesh Aggarwal, who is a member of the WHO’s Scientific and Technical Advisory Group on Viral Hepatitis, shared that the investment in viral hepatitis prevention and control is in public interest. “Investment in hepatitis C treatment will be paid back within seven years as the money that goes in managing the complications of the disease would be saved,” he explained.

Head of surgical gastroenterology, King George's Medical University, Prof Abhijit Chandra welcomed the move stating that prevention was a must for liver diseases. "Viruses causing hepatitis B and C nibble the liver for several years before the problem caused by them comes to light. But by this time, a simple infection develops into a disease called chronic hepatitis — the commonest cause of cirrhosis and liver cancers."

It is for this that gastroenterologists in the world emphasise on prevention of the disease. "Immunisation has led to a 20-fold reduction in hepatitis B cases in 150 countries of the world where infants are routinely given the vaccine,” shared Prof Chandra welcoming the move.


