{"datetime": "2018-07-12T12:18:35+05:30"}
NAINITAL: In a bid to curb maternal mortality ratio and female foeticide in the state, the Uttarakhand high court on Wednesday directed the health secretary to ensure that silent observer devices are installed in sonography machines in private clinics in the state. The devices, which are to be installed within three months, record all sonographies which would help clamp down on sex determination tests. The devices have already been installed in many government hospitals. 


The high court also asked the chief secretary of the state to issue necessary directions to all diagnostic centres in the state to supply a list of all expecting mothers and their due dates to the office of the chief medical officer concerned. The move aims to lower the maternal mortality ratio in Uttarakhand which stands at 201 per 1,00,000 live births. 

The division bench of justices Rajiv Sharma and Lok Pal Singh in the order dated June 14 stated that the CMO should ensure that the exact date of delivery of the expectant mothers is notified to him. 

“The CMO concerned through his subordinate officers/anganwadi centres shall remain in contact with the expectant mothers one month prior to delivery for group psychological counselling and anti-natal checking of haemoglobin, urine, albumin and sugar, malaria, HIV, blood group screening etc in all government hospitals under the Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan (PMSMA),” the bench said.

“It shall be open to all the expectant mothers to send an application to the CMO concerned for making arrangements of safe delivery in the nearest government hospital, if necessary, by transporting expectant mothers to the nearest government hospital by making all the necessary arrangements including free conveyance, lodging and boarding for the expectant mothers belonging to inaccessible/ difficult areas,” the bench said.

The court also directed the state government to supply a balanced diet to all pregnant women belonging to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes and also to those below the poverty line. 

The HC also directed the state government to make general public aware of the provisions of the Pre-Conception & Pre-Natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prevention & Prohibition) Act, 1994 (PCPNDT Act). 


