{"datetime": "2018-09-14T13:55:42+05:30"}
NEW DELHI: At traffic signals on busy days, the slight tapping on my car’s window by a transgender would often unnerve me. They are persistent, and there is a common notion that they will cause embarrassment if you don't hand them money. At another friend’s sangeet ceremony, a band of transgenders swayed to peppy tunes amidst peel of laughter. These are the only experiences that I could recall. And so do many others.



But is this all to their identity?

Hijra Habba was organised in the capital on the 11th of September. The name may sound weird since its synonymous with the transgender community, and so it was. With over 400 transgenders in attendance, Hijra Habba brought diverse voices from across the country, of active members from the LGBT community, to discuss the need for change at the level of education, policy-making and community interaction to effectively normalise lives for the third gender. The event held greater significance in the light of the recent Supreme Court decision decriminalising Section 377.


Born This Way

It’s not just Lady Gaga’s popular song, but also the theme of this year’s Hijra Habba. Their lifestyle is not an inconvenience but a truth that we have to accept in all its diverseness. "Altering the behaviour and attitudes of the people and sensitisation of the masses is the reason why we have this platform", says Sonal Mehta, Chief Executive, India HIV/AIDS Alliance. Alliance India is an NGO credited with organising this gathering. They work on capacity building, knowledge sharing, technical support and advocacy to people living with HIV. "A lot of issues pertaining to basic rights and opportunities need to be talked about. They have a right to lead ordinary lives and not be fraught with glass ceilings in the simplest of ideas such as that of a whole family," says Nipun Srivastava, consultant for the NGO. While trans people may have been qualified as the third gender, do they, as legitimate citizens, have access to rights and opportunity that others enjoy?

Remember Vicks tear jerking ad called Touch of Care? It touched upon the issues of adoption and transgender rights. It featured Gauri Sawant, a beautiful, magnanimous transgender woman and LGBT activist, who adopted a girl named Gayatri, whom she had saved from being sold. She was present at the Hijra Habba, and spoke to timesofindia.com. "I was the first transgender petitioner to file a case in the Supreme Court regarding adoption rights to transgenders. I am not proud of if but ashamed that I had to go to the court to ask for what should be mine intrinsically."

Gauri has set up her own NGO, Sakhi Char Chowghi in Malad, Mumbai and dedicates her time to providing for other marginalised - transgenders, hijras, female sex workers among other. "Motherhood is not a state, it is a behaviour. We love someone, which automatically makes us a mother. This need to nurture is natural, and we deserve it as much as a heterosexual woman or man."

Gauri has also started Aaji cha Ghar, a safe and friendly home for the abandoned girl children of sex workers and destitute senior transgenders. It is a project under Sai Sawli Trust and also her dream project. But sadly, Gauri has little support from the government. All help comes from milaap fundraisers. But she is a firm believer in Swami Vivekananda's saying that you must not ask the society what it can do for you, but prove that you can do so much for the society.

You and I may celebrate the victory of the community that has been suppressed and made to feel oppressed about their existence, and often completely denied any rights whatsoever. Indians may thump its chest loudly for doing away with the arbitrary and unfair treatment meted out to the LGBTQ community, in theory at least. But the battle is half won, however for the society, because it isn’t just section 377 they fought tooth and nail. With the law finally in their favour, will the marginalised community feel at ease? No.

This was the response of over three dozen people who were asked this question. And one of the factors is a common understanding, rooted in some studies, that HIV/AIDS is spread more widely in the LGBTQ community.

It is a catcall for discrimination - being HIV positive, or being a transgender. There are some who are both. The National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) India estimates that HIV's prevalence amongst transgenders is at 7.5%. In addition to the deviance inscribed on the bodies of those who are markedly different from the ‘regular’ folk, the stigma attached to people living with HIV has made matters worse.

"It is a widely believed that HIV spreads more prominently among homosexuals. We have never been to the root of the issue which is lack of healthcare facilities for the LGBTQ community especially transgenders, who are turned away from hospitals at times due to institutional or individual prejudices. The absence of structural support in terms of education employment and health has made transgenders far more likely to take to substance abuse," opines Ritika, who works with Vihaan, a programme that works to reduce stigma and discrimination against HIV affected people. And her words are true. A study by the National Institute of Epidemiology among 60,000 transgender people across 17 states revealed that the biggest perpetrators of violence against transgender people were police and law-enforcing authorities. In a country where the system is against them, this community has little hope.

But some people have been fighting this stigma from within the society. Simran Shaikh, a senior program officer at Wajood is one such individual. She enlists why events like Hijra Habba are a necessity. "Wajood focuses on access to sexual health and mitigating violence among the transgender community. HIV is not transgender community specific; it impacts people all over. But transgenders have been on the receiving end of a lot of sexual abuse, which also exacerbates the current status. Additionally, due to social ostracization, many trans individuals are pushed into becoming sex workers. It also happens due to the unavailability of other job opportunities. Such social realities need to be kept into account when dealing with an HIV positive transgender. They need to be counselled since most of them face familial boycott at a very young age, among other gross injustices such as tantric practices performed on them."

Hijra Habba highlighted the sense of community between people of the LGBTQ spectrum and also brought into light their isolation from the wider society. There were dance and musical performances, a fashion show, and even a theatre performance by Asmita group. It is however a sobering feeling - the community has to put on a show to make its voice heard. Many in the crowd quietly mocked the display of exuberance of the organisers and the participants alike.

But it does not deter Simran Shaikh, who adopted a girl, in spite of all deterrence from the society. "Today they are laughing at us, but they must be absorbing something from this experience. Tomorrow, when they see a transgender begging on the road, they’ll hopefully realise that we are not born to just beg or be sex workers. After today, they will know that we can do a lot more, like any other person around them. We just need a chance. It is our right."

