{"datetime": "2017-09-22T23:38:37+05:30"}
Kochi: Mother of a minor girl with leukaemia who was infected with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) allegedly after undergoing blood transfusion at Regional Cancer Centre (RCC), Thiruvananthapuram, has approached the Kerala high court seeking a probe by the central government.

In a petition filed before the high court on Friday, the girl’s mother sought an order directing a probe by the secretary of ministry of health and family welfare as well as by the chief secretary of the state government.

The petitioner alleged that the state government failed to take any action even after orders were issued by the state human rights commission and the child rights commission.

In the petition, the mother points out that all bodily tests, including the one for HIV, were carried out at the time of admission to RCC on September 28 and the result was negative. After the blood transfusion from the blood bank of RCC, the girl was affected by HIV virus. This was confirmed by further tests done at RCC and various hospitals, the petition stated.

“The patient admitted for cancer treatment became an HIV patient. The irresponsibility and culpable negligence of the hospital and authorities are in violation to the natural right and right to live, which was guaranteed under the Constitution of India. The state human rights commission and child rights commissions had suo motu intervened in the matter and directed for urgent actions. But nothing was done by the state government other than forming some inquiry committees as usual,” the petition said.

The petitioner, along with seeking a court order for a probe by central government, has also demanded compensation, rehabilitation, and treatment for the victim. A probe must be conducted by the central government and the chief secretary of the state government against the erring officials and also whether similar incidents occurred during blood transfusion before at RCC and other hospitals. As an interim measure, the government must be directed to grant adequate financial aid to the victim, the petitioner has demanded.

Reports by high-level team appointed by the state government, the Kerala AIDS Control Society and an internal probe held by the cancer centre had stated that RCC was not at fault. 

The report by the high-level team said there was no technical error on the part of the RCC. As per the report, the virus might have been transmitted through the blood which was transfused during the window period. A person who has freshly contracted HIV may take four to 12 weeks for the virus to be detected.


