{"datetime": "2018-02-23T16:51:27+05:30"}
NEW DELHI. In a sensational incident from Bhadohi district of Uttar Pradesh, an HIV infected woman (name withheld to protect identity) has been arrested for conspiring with her second husband to kill her first husband.

 The woman’s second husband Jiten Maurya was eyeing property of her first husband Sudhir Dixit, when they both hatched the plot to get rid of him. Maurya knew that sooner or later his wife too would die because of HIV, hence decided to acquire the land and house that Dixit had reportedly bought for her, spending his entire savings.

 The crime took place on the night of February 18. On February 19, the local police found dead body of Farrukhabad resident Dixit lying on roadside. The murder was so grievous that the cops were shocked at the brutality. Dixit had multiple blade wounds, while his hands, mouth and legs were tied with tape.

 An investigation led by the local superintendent of police found that Dixit was murdered in his house by his wife and Maurya. His corpse was then stuffed in a van and dropped off about 15 kms from his residence.

 It all started in 2015, when the accused woman met Maurya and both fell in love. They later married and had a daughter. However, the woman had previously married Dixit in 2001, and she once again came in touch with him 14 years later. Both became intimate and the woman decided to quietly leave Maurya and her daughter to live with Dixit once again.

 All this while, none of the husbands was aware that their wife has had two marriages. When it came to Maurya’s knowledge that his wife had another husband, he called her and got to know that she also has AIDS.

 Maurya became greedy after becoming aware of Dixit’s properties. The woman again became close to Maurya and that’s when both devised a plan to kill Dixit.

 The police has now arrested both and an inquiry is on to find if the couple had any other motive for the crime.

Content courtesy: Navbharat Times

Read this story in Hindi here

