{"datetime": "2018-02-20T22:36:35+05:30"}
JAIPUR: Inmates of jails across Rajasthan will undergo testing for HIV with the Rajasthan State AIDS Control Society (RSACS) and Rajasthan Prisons headquarter, Rajasthan signing an MoU for providing HIV prevention and treatment services on Tuesday. 

Recently in Udaipur’s prison, the health authorities conducted screening of 2119 inmates and 40 of them were tested positive for HIV. Besides, there were more than 15 intravenous drug users. 

According to the RSCACS officials, national HIV counselling and testing services guidelines by NACO in 2016 state that HIV screening/confirmation should be included as an integral component of the healthcare service package being offered to the inmates living in prison settings. 

The MoU says, “The spread of HIV among people living in prisons has significant public health implications as almost all of them return to their community thereby facilitating the spread of HIV infection to the general population.”

However, state’s director general of prisons Bhupendra Singh said, “We are already providing the healthcare facilities to inmates but we are thinking to re-conceptulise how to organise healthcare services not only for HIV but also for other health related issues including non-communicable diseases such as diabetes and hypertension.”

He said that there are certain issued such as shortage of guards who accompany an inmate to healthcare facilities for treatment. He said that they are taking up the issue and also making provisions to strengthen the healthcare facilities within the prisons so that the requirement of travel to health centres will be minimised. 

Speaking on the occasion, additional chief secretary Veenu Gupta said, “Bhilwara, Chitorgarh and Dungarpur are also emerging as high priority districts. The prevalence among migrants and truckers is 2- 3 times higher than that of ANC clinic attendees, adding belief to the hypothesis that migration is playing an important role in Rajasthan.”

