{"datetime": "2016-11-30T08:46:12+05:30"}
PANAJI: Until recently, 16-year-old Rihan Gauns (name changed) was often bullied by some of his classmate. A class XI student, Rihan is HIV positive, an infection he got from his parents who are now long dead. His is a two-pronged struggle. On the one hand, while he fights the infection in his body, on the other he has to battle social ostracism. 

Gauns is one among the 253 children and adolescents living with HIV in Goa, for whom life is a daily struggle. As they cope up with their life-threatening ailment, they battle virtually everyday with society, which looks on them with suspicion.

President of Human Touch, Peter Borges informed that one or both parents of most of these children are dead. Some live with their extended family or with a single parent while some are being raised in orphanage.

The HIV status, whether that of a child or an adult, is not revealed, but sometimes it does come out exposing them to discrimination, Borges said. 

“We managed to stop bullying in Rihan’s case after we approached the school management, but it was a difficult situation nonetheless,” said Peter who added that society should be more accepting of such children, and disease itself. 

Some of the 253 children living with HIV are in their teens. There are a few who are above 18 years of age, too. 

Though the government provides a monthly allowance of Rs 2,000 to persons living with HIV, Borges said not all are able to avail of the allowance due to bureaucratic hassles. 

There are five youngsters under his guidance for whom he has arranged a room to stay as they have no family members to rely on. 

To provide care and support, Goa State NGO forum on HIV/AIDs, comprising of eight NGOs, has analysed the main obstacles facing HIV+ children and charted an action agenda to overcome the same. 

The biggest challenge before those who are above 18 years of age is what to do next. 

Some though are completing their education. 

The NGOs want the government to intervene and help this segment of the society that has been left behind.


