{"datetime": "2018-07-15T09:33:34+05:30"}
KOLKATA: The dream project of 10 HIV-positive teenagers — that had hit many hurdles, from finding a house to acceptance by locals — finally started brewing from a Jodhpur Park address on Saturday afternoon. Café Positive, an entrepreneurship project by the 10 HIV-positive boys and girls, became operational at a 12 feet by 10 feet garage space at 524 Jodhpur Park in south Kolkata.


The youths struggled managing the sudden rush on Day 1at the café that saw a huge acceptance from the Jodhpur Park neighbourhood as people started coming in and congratulating the young owners for their grit, determination and initiative while having café latte or iced tea.


TimesViewInitiatives like this are necessary to dispel perceptions that have no basis in reality. It takes a lot of courage to swim against the tide. We hope this example will prompt more such efforts.
“I had read about the youths in the newspapers and empathised with them in their struggle. That they have finally found a place and that too in our neighbourhood feels great. Had I had a place to offer, I would have come forward and helped them long ago,” said Sharmistha Mitra, a resident of a Jodhpur Park apartment and one of the first few customers at the café.

TOI had first reported on March 5 how six boys and four girls, who had undergone training in baking, sandwich-making and coffee and mocktail preparations, aspired to start their own coffee shop at some location in south Kolkata but were turned down by house owners.

For youths like Sathi Biswas (name changed), Susanta Pal (name changed) and eight others who overcame the hurdles for almost a year, it was a dream come true moment. “We were turned down by so many house owners that at one point of time we had started wondering if we can at all open the café. But we are glad that the day has finally come,” said Biswas, serving Espresso and muffins to two new patrons.

Helping them out was Kallol Ghosh, the brain behind the café and the founder of Anandaghar, where the teenagers were brought up. “It’s a day I have been dreaming for long. We had faced strange reasons from people for refusing space to these teenagers. While some said their family members were not ready, others said people in the neighbourhood wouldn’t allow them to run a business with HIV-positive patients. But finally the day has come when the ten have found the platform to break the myths surrounding the disease,” said Ghosh, who runs an NGO, Offer.

Actor Parambrata Chatterjee, who was also present at the inauguration, said: “I was disheartened when I came to know that a city like Kolkata was hesitant to give an opportunity to them. Now that they have made it, I am really glad and hope the people turn up in large numbers to taste the delicacies prepared by the youths.”


