{"datetime": "2018-02-15T22:45:00+05:30"}
Vijayapura: To mark World Marriage Day, a unique marriage was conducred here on Monday in which two HIV-positive orphans were united in wedlock as per the Hindu tradition.

Sanjeevini, 24, (name changed), from Vijayapura city, and Sriram (name changed), 32, from Jamakhandi town got married in the presence of deputy commissioner K B Shivamumar and his wife, Christian priests and social workers. Some foreigners too were present at the event.

According to Peter Alexander, a social worker who took the lead in arranging this marriage, said, “The girl is HIV-positive due to her mother and the boy contracted the disease. Both are happy to be together in marriage.”

Sanjeevini, who has studied up to class 10, was brought up by Peter Alexander ever since she was 10 years old. She said: “ I never thought I’d get married but thanks to Peter, it has actually happened. My relatives always kept away from me, and that was saddening.”

Sriram has studied up to PUC and works as a guard wth a security agency in Jamakhandi town. He told TOI: “Due to the social stigma, no one came forward to look after me. Despite the challenges, I completed my education and started working. I attended the Vadhu Vara Samavesh held specially for HIV-affected people at Hassan. I couldn’t find a suitable girl there. When I returned to Vijayapura, I contacted ART centre counsellor Ravi Kittur and sought his help to find a bride.”

While she belongs to the Maratha Gondali community, he’s from the Ganiga community.

Ravi Kittur said, “This is the 25th marriage of HIV-positive people held under my supervision. Twelve more such youngsters are awaiting their turn.”

Federation of Non-Governmental Organizations, T P Alexander, Insaf Organization, Vijayapura Orphanage, Bhruntimath Kanunu Criyatmak Vedike and Rotary Pariwar organized the marrage. Vitthal Upadhye conducted the marriage. District surgeon Dr Mahendra Kapse, advocate Mallikarjun Bhrungimath, social workers N K Managond, T S Pathan, Vijayapura Orphanage superintendent B L Desai and others were also present.


