{"datetime": "2018-01-29T12:35:30+05:30"}
New Delhi: Pharmaceutical company Strides Shasun today said its wholly-owned subsidiary has received approval from the US health regulator for tenofovir disoproxil fumarate tablets, used to treat HIV-1 infections in adults. 

In a BSE filing, it said Strides Pharma Global Pte. has received approval from the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) for tenofovir disoproxil fumarate tablets, 300 mg. 

The approved product is a generic version of Gilead's Viread tablets, for which patent expired on January 25. 

Strides Shasun, which already had tentative approval for the product from the USFDA, said it will launch the product immediately. 

Citing IMS sales data, the company said the US market for tenofovir disoproxil fumarate tablets is approximately USD 750 million. 

The company's stock was trading 1.90 per cent higher at Rs 806 on BSE. 
y, a third, more potent line of treatment has finally been rolled out across 10 hospitals in India, including JJ in Mumbai, Maulana Azad in Delhi, others in Kolkata, Chennai, etc. 18 patients from Maharashtra have been enrolled for this higher grade of anti-retroviral therapy (ART), which is at least 15 times more expensive than the firstline treatment.

 The Byculla JJ facility, the nodal centre for HIV treatment in the state, has begun the exercise of screening 2,214 patients who are currently on second-line drugs. Doctors will look for a rapidly swelling viral load in them before concluding that the existing treatment regime is no longer effective to suppress the virus. "Any patient with a viral load of above 10,000 copiesmL will immediately be started on the third-line which will be a combination of Raltegravir (400mg), Darunavir (600mg) and Ritonavir (100mg)," said Dr Vidya Nagar, nodal officer at JJ Hospital.

 The news that the state-run healthcare network is making available a third and more potent line of drugs has come as a huge relief. "The cost for third-line is at least 15 times more expensive than the first and five to six times more than the second line. Several patients have died only because they could not afford the treatment," said Ganesh Acharya, a member of the Mumbai AIDS Forum. Many were even taking the drugs from the private sector but could not sustain for long. Additional project director at Mumbai District Aids Control Society, Dr Shrikala Acharya, said the annual cost of the third-line regimen was around Rs 1.5 lakh for each patient.

 Drug resistance is one of the challenges for the HIV/AIDS programme. According to studies, resistance is less than 1% in first-line and 2-3% in the second-line. "We have detected around 60-70 resistant patients across India so far against our estimation of 500. But we have drugs for more than 1,000 patients and we can procure more," said Dr BB Rewari, national programme officer, National Aids Control Organisation.

 Adult HIV prevalence at the national level has seen a decline from an estimated 0.38% in 2001-03 to 0.26% in 2015. Rise in new infections however has been a major point of concern. In 2015, over 86,000 new infections were detected across India. Resistance poses an additional challenge as treatment failure translates into a high viral load in patients. 
