{"datetime": "2018-09-06T20:33:48+05:30"}
NEW DELHI: Senior BJP leader, Subramanian Swamy, said that homosexuality is a genetic disorder in response to the Supreme Court's judgement decriminalising gay sex on Thursday.


Swamy admitted that people are entitled to their privacy but said that homosexuality is a disorder similar to someone having six fingers. 

"Of course what happens in someone's private life should not be of anyone's concern, neither they should be punished. It is basically a genetic disorder, like someone having six fingers. Medical research must be done to rectify it,"Swami was quoted as saying by the news agency ANI.

The senior BJP leader further commented that legalising gay sex can lead to increase in HIV cases in India.

"It is the American game. Soon there will be gay bars here where homosexuals can go. HIV will spread. So, after looking at the consequences I hope the next government will move a 7 judge bench to set aside this 5 judge bench order," said Swamy.

On his social media account, the former union minister criticised the Supreme Court for not criminalising sex with animals. 


The Supreme Court refused to strike down that part of Section 377 IPC which made sex with animals a crime. Does thi… https://t.co/1witmygh3v— Subramanian Swamy (@Swamy39) 1536221906000
On the other hand, the young BJP MP from North Mumbai, Poonam Mahajan, celebrating the SC's verdict called it a victory of equality.


Happiness all around as Equality prevails again ! #Section377— Poonam Mahajan (@poonam_mahajan) 1536228779000
Mahajan is national president of Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha, youth wing of BJP. She has been at the forefront of BJP's millennium voter program aimed at first time voters in the country participating in 2019 general elections.

On Thursday the Supreme Court ruled consensual intercourse among adult homosexuals or heterosexuals in private space does not harm public decency or morality.

In a landmark verdict, Chief Justice Dipak Misra and Justice A M Khanwilkar, who wrote the main 166-page judgement, held that Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code had become an "odious weapon" to harass the LGBT community which was made "societal pariah" by subjecting them to discrimination and unequal treatment.

The CJI held that Section 377 in its present form violated Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution that deals with freedom of speech and expression.

(with inputs from agency)

