{"datetime": "2018-06-15T13:27:45+05:30"}
PANAJI: The green mussel (Perna viridis), a delicacy much popular among locals as well as tourists, finds favour with scientists at the Goa-based National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) for its pharmaceutical potential. The scientists have developed and patented a product derived from the shellfish that has very effective anti-viral properties, including against HIV.

“In 2001, we screened the green mussel against malaria and developed a product called mussel hydrolysate (MuHy) from the meat of the shellfish. A patent for it was filed in collaboration with different institutions in India,” said former NIO scientist Dr Anil Chatterji.

In 2006, the product was licenced for Rs 2 crore to an Indian company for commercial production.

“Isolation of new compounds from green mussel will help in developing new and effective drugs at prices that are affordable for the common man,” senior scientist at NIO, Dr R A Sreepada said, adding that, so far, no attempt has been made to produce any kind of drug from green mussel.

“MuHy is also very active against HIV, tuberculosis and osteoporosis,” Chatterji said. Elaborating on the action of the product on HIV Sreepada said, “There are two types of anti-HIV drugs, each having a different target. MuHy, a kind of therapeutic agent, hits both targets.” 

The product is a result of a joint research NIO had conducted with the Russian St Petersburg Pasteur Institute in 2001. At the time, through a collaborative programme, Russians scientists taught their NIO counterparts how to explore the pharmaceutical potential of green mussel extracts.

Russia’s coastal belt is blessed with an abundance of blue mussels, the MuHy of which was proven to have preventive and therapeutic properties in tackling influenza virus. It was this critical find that led the Russian scientists to India.

Sreepada said that together they checked the efficacy of the MuHy on various viruses in India and discovered that the green mussels of Goa have anti-viral compounds just like their blue counterparts in Russia.

“In Russia, MuHy has a very big market and is sold for human and animal use,” Sreepada said.

Sadly, in Goa, naturally growing mussels are being plucked at a juvenile stage by fishermen owing to demand by the tourism industry thus leading to depletion of this shellfish resource in the state. “Mussels are also being impacted by habitat degradation due to various reasons. There should be steady efforts made for the large scale expansion of mussel culture in the state,” NIO director Dr Sunil Kumar Singh said.

For this, he advised that Goa has to develop hatcheries for green mussel culture. This way, fish farmers can have year-round spats or seeds of mussel instead of waiting for the annual season for sustainable large scale production.


