{"datetime": "2018-08-05T08:29:18+05:30"}
CHANDIGARH: Viscera sample in 49 suspected drug overdose deaths tested positive for narcotics and psychotropic substances at the state government-run Chemical Examiner Lab, Kharar, between August 2017 and July 2018, according to data. This takes the monthly average to four. 

The figure was the highest in the month of July, when 23 viscera samples tested positive. This, however, does not mean that these 49 people died of a drug overdose, as there are plenty of other reasons behind such fatalities, said experts. They said the viscera report, even if the sample tests positive for narcotics and psychotropic substances, is to be studied along with the postmortem report to corroborate the main cause.




Data with the laboratory showed that 40 viscera samples tested positive for morphine (opioids), one for cocaine, two for tramadol (drug to treat pain), and six for benzodiazepines (drug to treat anxiety). As on August 1, 45 viscera cases were pending for reporting at the laboratory.

Health and family welfare minister Brahm Mohindra said, “Chemical examiner laboratory does not declare the cause of death and it is done by the medical officer concerned, after taking into consideration viscera report as well as the postmortem report.” He said as a norm, viscera reports are sent to the SSPs or commissioners of police concerned, and these are then sent to the medical officer who has conducted postmortem, to declare the cause of death after taking into consideration postmortem findings as well as pathological reports.

Following a spurt in suspected drug overdose deaths in recent past, Kharar laboratory was flooded with viscera samples from across Punjab. As per laboratory data, 73 viscera samples of suspected drug overdose deaths were allotted to seven analysts at the laboratory in July. In 14 such cases, the laboratory also got syringes with needles and utensils. Of the total viscera cases, 32 samples were analysed and 23 found positive for narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, two for celphos (aluminium phosphide, an agricultural pesticide) and one for chorocompounds (insecticides), says the laboratory report.

The list of suspected drug overdose viscera cases sent to Kharar laboratory, accessed by TOI, reveal the police have registered FIRs and daily diary reports (DDRs) in these cases under various sections of the Indian Penal Code (IPC). Though most of the DDRs have been registered under Section 174 of CrPC (police to enquire and report on suicide), some FIRs have been registered for abetment of suicide, murder, causing hurt by means of poison with intent to commit an offence and culpable homicide not amounting to murder.

Therefore, the experts are of the view that a person who has committed suicide after having drugs cannot be said to have died of drugs. Or, if a person under the influence of drugs had gotten into a fight and died in the attack cannot be said to have died of a drug overdose. Dr P D Garg, head of the psychiatry department of Government Medical College, Amritsar, and director of Swami Vivakanand De-addiction Centre, said, “It is necessary to analyse viscera as well as postmortem to reach the conclusion about the cause of death. There are so many reasons since the drug addict is prone to suicide, homicide, and violence. A drug addict can die due to pneumonia, which is very common due to complications of heroin addiction and HIV.”

Kharar laboratory records as on July 25 show that of the total 82 visceras of suspected drug overdose deaths, 36 were of people in the age group of 21-25 years, 24 in the age group of 26-30 years, eight below 20 years, and 14 above 30 years.



