{"datetime": "2018-03-11T10:03:21+05:30"}
AGRA: A 76-year-old inmate at the district jail here having HIV infection died on Friday evening. Convicted for abetment to suicide, cruelty to woman and dowry demand, the man was serving a seven-year term in jail. According to sources, if the post-mortem report confirms that he died of AIDS related complications, then it would be first such case in the jail.
 
 The convict hailed from Achhnera area of Agra and was sent to jail on February 22, 2018.

 Speaking with TOI, jail superintendent Shashikant Mishra said, “Since the day of admission in jail, the convict showed symptoms of illness. Therefore, we kept him in the medical care room built inside the jail. Later, when his condition deteriorated, we shifted him to S N Medical College on March 7. But on March 9 evening, he breathed his last.”

 The jailer said before his death, the convict had complained of breathlessness and his medical record showed that he was HIV positive. His body has been sent for post-mortem. 

 Earlier, taking suo motu cognizance of media reports that several prisoners have been detected as HIV positive over the past few months at district jails in the state, the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) had issued notice to chief secretary and inspector general (prisoner) of UP seeking detail reports in the matter. Officials were also asked to give a report on steps taken to deal with the problem.

 According to a survey conducted by the Uttar Pradesh State AIDS Control Society, 460 jail inmates tested HIV positive. The screening for HIV was initiated at health camps set up in February 2016 in all 67 district jails of Uttar Pradesh.

 In a statement issued on Saturday, principal secretary, home, Arvind Kumar said 356 inmates had tested HIV positive among 99,000 screened till January 31, 2018.

 According to Kumar, “Those inmates who are HIV positive, are given regular medical aid. Under Prison HIV intervention program, 64 medical staff of 45 districts jails were sensitized on how to take care of HIV positive inmates.”

 According to the data accessed by TOI, a total 1,960 prisoners died in central, district, women and special jails of the state between January 2012 and July 2017 due to various reasons. Of these, the maximum deaths, of 170 inmates, was reported from jails in Bareilly (129 from the central jail here), followed by 140 from Fatehgarh (110 from central jail). Agra was in the third position regarding casualties with 79 deaths reported in Agra central jail and 43 in the district jail.
