{"datetime": "2018-08-12T08:31:30+05:30"}
TRICHY/COIMBATORE: With the Mettur reservoir attaining its full capacity of 120 feet for the second time this year, the excess water was released into Kollidam river from Mukkombu (Upper Anaicut) to avert a flood-like situation along the Cauvery delta districts on Saturday. People residing along the Kollidam river and low-lying areas have been asked to move to safer places.

Heavy monsoon showers in Karnataka had filled the Kabini and Krishnarajasagar reservoirs leading to subsequent release of water from the two dams in Cauvery. An inflow of 1.33 lakh cusecs was recorded at Mettur in the evening following which 77,501 cusec was released into Cauvery. A senior PWD river conservation official said that the water from Mettur was expected to reach Mayanur dam in Karur district in the intervening night of Saturday and Sunday or at during early morning on Sunday. The 50,000 cusecs released from the reservoir reached Mukkombu (Upper Anaicut) on Saturday evening. Subsequently, 18,000 cusecs was released into Kollidam river around 7 pm and the discharge was expected to be enhanced based on the inflow. About 34,000 cusecs was let into Kollidam two weeks ago due to heavy inflow from Mettur and a maximum of 30,000 cusecs was released into Cauvery, he added.

Mettur reservoir had reached its full capacity on July 23 after a gap of nearly five years. This is the 40th time the 85-year-old dam has reached its full capacity — it had reached the brim four times in 2004 and five times in 2005. Meanwhile, revenue authorities from Karur, Trichy, Thanjavur, Tiruvarur, Nagapattinam and Cuddalore have asked the people living along the banks of Cauvery, Kollidam and low-lying areas to move to safer areas and safeguard their livestock and belongings.

District revenue and public works department officials have been informing the public by way of public address systems and tom-tom. People have been advised not to get into water pathways, take bath, wash their cattle or take picture or selfies near water pathways. The executive engineer of PWD (river conservation division) T P Ganesan told TOI that all precautionary measures have been taken to avert any untoward incidents due to the flow of water in Kollidam as well as Cauvery.

“Out of 75 lakes in Trichy district, 74 are maintained by PWD. Of these lakes getting water from Cauvery, 42 are already filled. Within two or three weeks, the remaining water bodies will also be filled”, he further stated.


