{"datetime": "2018-08-02T14:32:48+05:30"}
LUDHIANA: The mobile van to track suspected patients suffering from tuberculosis (TB) reached Koom Kalan on Wednesday.

Dr R P Bhatia, senior medical officer (SMO), community health centre, Koom Kalan, flagged off the mobile van equipped with cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CB-NAAT) machine to detect TB patients.

On Wednesday, 8 patients were tested out of which two were found positive.

SMO Dr Bhatia said CB-NAAT is a molecular test, which simultaneously detects mycobacterium tuberculosis and rifampicin drug resistance. The automated provides results within two hours. A single test from the CB-NAAT machine costs around Rs 5,000 per test, however the department will provide free of cost services to the people on the doorsteps.

He said the state government is going to install 7 CB-NAAT machines to diagnose suspected and drug-resistant patients suffering from TB in Ludhiana, Patiala, Jalandhar and Amritsar in addition to one CB-NAAT machine already installed in 22 districts having excessive migrated population to control TB in high-risk areas of the state.

Dr Bhatia said it is matter of serious concern that around 2 million people are suffering from TB in India those can easily infect the high-risk groups of old age people, children, diabetic and HIV patients.

“As per record of health department as many as 39,218 patients were registered in public sectors and 6,704 patients were registered in private sectors in state during 2017.”

Highlighting the importance of CB-NAAT machines, the SMO said it has been medically recorded that in some cases microscopic test failed to diagnose TB in affected patients where CB-NAAT machines being high-tech, are most accurate alternate of early diagnostic mechanism, thus, help in methodical treatment of patients.

The mobile van had reached Ludhiana on Tuesday. The van will stay in the city for the next four days and will visit various peripheral areas to check TB patients and start their immediate treatment.

The district health department has record of around 4,500 TB patients who are under treatment and every month more patients are adding to the list.

Civil surgeon Parwinder Pal Singh Sidhu flagged off the van for slum areas and vehras in Sahnewal on Tuesday. On August 3 it will visit Daba, Lohara, Janta Nagar and Shimlapuri.

On the last day (August 4), it will scan suspected patients in Basti Jodhewal. The prisoners in central jail will also be tested in the mobile van and their treatment will begin in the jail itself.

The civil surgeon claimed that the state government has started this mobile van to cover all districts of the state to identify suspected patients suffering from TB. He said besides identification, treatment of such patients will also be ensured.

District TB officer Dr Ashish Chawla said, “Our health workers have already identified some of the suspected patients on the basis of their symptoms and now when this van will visit these areas and these people will be tested on the spot. The report will come in two hours.”

He said the workers would note down the details of the patients if they test positive so that they could be sent for treatment. He said in June last year, 800 new TB patients were detected in the government hospital and 641 came through private sector. The number of patients is increasing as this is an infectious disease, he added.


