{"datetime": "2017-08-23T07:14:57+05:30"}
Mumbai: Maharashtra detected the highest number of new HIV infections among states in 2016-17, accounting for 16% of the country’s 1.84 lakh fresh cases. Among the infected were 1,567 newborns who probably didn’t get the preventive drugs on time, while 200 adults got the disease due to transfusion with infected blood.

This is the second year in a row when the state held on to the dubious distinction of reporting maximum cases after occupying the second and third positions through the last decade. Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka were the only states to report 20,000-plus new infections in 2016-17.

RTI data obtained from the National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) showed while the state is recording a year-on-year decline, the rate is less than many other high-prevalence states. The state also reported the most mother-to-child transmissions in the country. In the last five years, at least 10,449 newborns got the infection despite the availability of the triple-drug regimen that cuts chances of transmission by 99%. 

Head of state-run JJ Hospital in Byculla, Dr Ashok Anand, said they have not delivered a single HIV-positive baby in the last three to four years. “Giving anti-retroviral to babies soon after birth as well as putting the mother on anti-retroviral therapy early has proved to be very effective,” he said. Chetan Kothari, who filed the RTI said, “It is shameful that even today babies are getting the deadly disease when drugs are readily available.” 

Parimal Singh, who heads the Maharashtra State Aids Control Society (MSACS), defended the programme and said not just mother-to-child transmission but HIV among general and high-risk populations has been on a decline. “It must be taken into consideration that we came to the top spot only after Andhra Pradesh was divided. As far as babies getting HIV is concerned, today HIV+ mothers are no longer afraid of giving birth and this is the programme’s achievement,” he said. MSACS’ data shows from 2009-10 when HIV positivity in general population was around 5.23%, it has dropped to less than 1% today. 

State’s public health minister Dr Deepak Sawant added Maharashtra is in a vulnerable position given the huge load of migration. Data also shows a dip in transmission of the disease among homosexuals, bisexuals and transgenders. A few stakeholders however contest intervention to contain HIV in the state has lost steam. Arup Mukherjee, secretary general of the Nagpur-based Indian Red Cross Society, said a fund crunch has been hampering the project for the last two years. “The attrition rate is huge as NGOs are struggling to pay salaries on time. Often testing kits are not available,” he said. Sawant said NACO is responsible for providing 75% of funds. “The state is doing its bit,” he said. 

Singh added Maharashtra and Mumbai are role models for their HIV control strategies. Of course, even after three decades, both the state and city remain hotbeds for the infection.

