{"datetime": "2016-12-02T20:34:09+05:30"}
VADODARA: Students of a city-based varsity organised various activities to show solidarity and support to people living with HIV/AIDS to mark this year's World Aids Day.

Theme was 'Hands up for HIV prevention' as announced by the World Health Organization (WHO).

To mark the day, rural health training center and urban health training center of Parul University undertook demonstration of social, cultural, clinical and occupational issues related to HIV / AIDS. This was done by students of MBBS programme.

A talk on 'Prevention and control of HIV/AIDS' to community members by the Department of Preventive and Social Medicine was also organised.

Students paid homage to souls who departed with HIV / AIDS by lighting lamps while felicitation of two members of People Living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) from Vadodara was also done.

There was a role play and poster making competition themed on AIDS while a rally of more than 200 students from Faculty of Nursing followed by a street play and a role play at Kishanwadi aimed at bring awareness among people regarding how AIDS is caused and its prevention was also held.

Keywords:

ternational jury headed by Muzzafar Ali.

Accepting the Lifetime Achievement Award, which carries a scroll and cash prize of Rs 10 lakh, legendary Canadian filmmaker Atom Egoyan, said, “You have no idea how the cinema of India has influenced my career. I accept this award in the spirit of friendship between the two countries—India and Canada. We have a huge huge Indian community in Canada.”

Vivian Qu won the best director award, which carries a cash prize of Rs 15 lakh and Silver Peacock, for the Chinese film, Angels Wear White on child sexual abuse. The award for best debut feature film went to Kiro Russo for his Bolivia-Qatar film, Dark Skull. The award includes a cash prize of Rs 10 lakh. 

“I am nervous but honoured to win this award,” said Manoj Kadam, after his Marathi film Kshitij—A Horizon bagged the prestigious ICFT-Unesco Gandhi Medal for having a strong ethical component and artistic excellence, beating eight other films. 

Salman Khan, Akshay Kumar, Karan Johar, Katrina Kaif, Sushant Singh Rajput, Sidharth Malhotra and Papon were among the others celebrities at the closing ceremony, performing and presenting awards.


