{"datetime": "2018-09-03T06:14:01+05:30"}
MUMBAI: Chinmay Modi was nine when his mother’s sudden illness changed all their lives overnight. Besides his mother, Chinmay and his father too tested positive for HIV, considered a death sentence in 2002.


A single doctor consultation cost the family Rs 50,000 in Surat and the medicines another few extra thousands. Still at the end of every visit, Modi and his parents would return home dejected and feeling closer to death. Soon they decided to give up the expensive treatment and prepared to meet their end.

They went on without medicines for close to a year till India rolled out the national programme under which patients were given free antiretroviral medicines. “We were among the first 200 people in a Surat hospital to get that,” says Modi, crediting the government initiative that is presently keeping over a million alive.

Taking 15 pills was not easy for a nine-year-old. Modi, now 25, says he has been successfully taking ART for 16 years and could only do it because he had the support of a family. “The need of an emotional and social support in HIV treatment is not appreciated enough. No child wants to eat medicines daily when it causes diarrhoea and stomach pain. I could sustain the treatment as I come from a well-off family where I got adequate nutrition and push to have medicines everyday. Still opportunistic infections like herpes afflicted me,” says the member of National Coalition of People living with HIV India (NCPI+).

Modi says that while India did well in providing medicines, its efforts halted just there. “Even today, it is challenging for a child to eat medicines daily, hiding from friends and under the looming fear of getting caught,” he says. He, therefore, emphasizes on the role of a family, kin or a counsellor. “The child needs to know why he is eating medicines. In the absence of this awareness, they have low adherence levels, which in turn gives rise to resistance," he says. The government must find out why so many children are fast shifting from first to second line of drugs.

“There is no quality counselling. Not more than ten minutes is spared explaining them,” says Modi adding that now when children are living till adolescence and adulthood, the quality of their lives must be a part of the HIV narrative in the country.

