{"datetime": "2018-06-18T14:15:29+05:30"}
KOLKATA: Cafe Positive, a dream of 10 HIV-positive teenagers, has finally found an address.



The 12ft-by-10ft garage at Jodhpur Park was finalised after a six-month search for space in some of south Kolkata’s posh localities yielded a straightaway “no” from house-owners when they learnt about who will manage and run the shop.


TimesViewThis is a real sunshine story. Congratulations are in order for the property owners who have risen above such evidently widespread — but completely unfounded — prejudice. We hope the rest of the city learns from this; these kids deserve all our support in their struggle.

At 524 Jodhpur Park, a senior official of a leading national ayurvedic firm and an honorary member of Rotary Club of Calcutta has offered his garage space to the teenagers from where they plan to start the café in July. “I was initially a bit hesitant to offer my garage space as it is much smaller than what they were looking for. But after learning that they had failed to manage any space in over six months, I told them to start their business from here. This can be the beginning from where they can spread their wings. I am happy to be a part of this noble initiative,” said Indrajyoti Dasgupta.




Garage at Jodhpur Park was finalised after a six-month search for space in some of south Kolkata’s posh localities


Dasgupta, who has moved his car out of the garage for the café, is yet to find an alternate parking space.

TOI had reported on March 5 how six boys and four girls, who have undergone training in baking, sandwich-making and coffee and mocktail preparations, aspired to start their own coffee shop at some location in south Kolkata but were turned down by house-owners.




The 12ft-by-10ft garage at Jodhpur Park

“We faced strange reasons from people for refusing space to these kids. While some said their family members were not ready, others said people in the neighbourhood wouldn’t allow them to run a business with HIV-positive patients. But we are thankful to have finally found space. It is a much smaller space than what we were looking for, but at least the kids can start from here,” said Kallol Ghosh, founder of Anandaghar, a shelter for abandoned HIV/AIDS-infected children at Narendrapur.



 Cafe Positive, a dream of 10 HIV-positive teenagers


Cafe to start from July 14

N GO Anandaghar will give the initial funds and later hand over the management of the café to the 10 youths, who would be running it.

The café is scheduled to start from July 14, coinciding with Rath Yatra. “We will begin with an assortment of hot and cold coffees, mocktails and mojitos, and at least four types of cakes, veg and non-veg sandwiches and cookies. For now, we will bank more on takeaway service till we get a bigger place with a larger seating capacity,” said Susanta Pal (name changed), one of the 10 youths.

 “It has been a long wait. At one time, we thought we would never get space for our shop after being rejected by several house-owners. But now that we have finally managed one, I am happy and looking forward to a better future. We will be able to wipe off the taboos associated with the disease we suffer from with day-to-day interaction with our customers,” said Sathi Biswas (name changed), another member.



