{"datetime": "2017-11-29T08:27:09+05:30"}
KANNUR: The world is prepares to observe the 'AIDS Day' on December 1 in order to extend solidarity to people who are HIV positive and instil awareness about the disease in the society, but the stigma associated with the disease remains.

Take the case of a woman from Mayyil panchayat in Thrissur who has been facing discrimination just because her husband has been tested positive for HIV.

According to the woman, whose identity has not been disclosed, ever since her husband has been tested positive for HIV more than one and a half year ago, she has been facing ostracism and the local residents have not been sending their kids to the anganwadi, where she works. Though the authorities have permitted her to work there, she has been finding it difficult to tackle discrimination, the woman said.

Mayyil panchayat president P Balan, admitted that despite repeated efforts parents have been reluctant to send their children to the anganwadi. "The panchayat and the AIDS Control Society have taken steps to sensitise people and make them aware that nobody gets infected by physical contact with an HIV infected person. Moreover, it has not been confirmed whether she has been infected or not," he said.

District collector Mir Muhammed Ali said the authorities have been trying to find an amicable solution instead of making a hasty decision, and added that it was unfortunate that a literate and progressive society was reinforcing discrimination towards those tested positive for AIDS.

"First of all, we cannot force her to undergo a medical examination to confirm whether she has been infected. At the same time, we have to operate the anganwadi. We are planning to appoint an additional staff and retain her," said the collector at a press conference in connection with the World AIDS Day.

Such cases reflect the society's attitude and cannot be approved, said district panchayat president K V Sumesh, who urged the authorities to take initiatives to sensitise the society.

On the World AIDS Day, the department has been planning to strengthen awareness campaigns, said deputy DMO A T Manoj, nodal officer of HIV related activities in the district. He said all efforts would be taken to convince the woman to undergo a medical examination to ascertain whether she has been infected, so that she could be provided medical support.

"We want to make sure she faces no discrimination but what is even more important is to provide her medical assistance in case she has been infected with the virus. But for that she has to voluntarily come forward to undergo the medical examination. Hence, we are in the process of providing her counselling apart from sensitizing the society," he said.

District medical officer (DMO) K Narayana Nayak claimed stigma attached to the disease has been slowly coming down as also fresh cases of infection.

