{"datetime": "2018-06-20T08:29:14+05:30"}
NAGPUR: The problems people suffering from sickle cell disease face will be taken up with the government in right earnest and efforts made to get it recognized so that various facilities could be made available to them, said Dr Uday Bodhankar, president of Commonwealth Association for Health and Disability, on Tuesday.



Besides seeking official recognition to the sickle cell disease on the lines of polio and acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), the issue of giving these patients reservation in education and jobs will be pursued with the government, Dr Bodhankar said. He was speaking at a programme organized by Sickle Cell Society of India at Mor Bhavan, Sitabuldi.

The event was held to mark World Sickle Cell Day and create awareness about the disease.

In his address, Dr Ganju said the sickle cell disease should be eradicated as early as possible as over 50 lakh sufferers are leading a painful life in India. The disease is transferred from parents to child. If both are carriers of these genes, the child becomes a victim of this life-threatening disease. Constant hydration, avoiding exhaustion and improving supply of oxygen to body are therefore important for such patients, he added.

Sickle cell disease is a genetic disorder wherein red blood cells of the patient morph and take the shape of a sickle. These misshapen cells then have trouble freely moving around the blood stream and often clot and get stuck, causing extreme pain to the patient which can lead to life-threatening condition. This disease has no cure as of today, and the only relief from it is medicines and painkillers. 

Jaya, wife of Padma Shri recipient Sampat Ramteke, who founded the society, said her husband championed the cause of sickle cell patients after their son was diagnosed with the disease and worked hard for government to recognize this as a serious disease like polio and AIDS. She has been continuing her husband’s mission even after his death.

(Reporting by Ritika Gupta)


