{"datetime": "2017-03-21T20:07:35+05:30"}
NEW DELHI: The HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Bill, 2014, aimed at ensuring equal rights while seeking treatment, education and job by people living with HIV, was passed by the Rajya Sabha on Tuesday. 

The Bill also assumes significance as it protects such people from specific acts of discrimination by the state, or any other person. It also lays down penal provisions for any discrimination practised against a person with HIV/AIDS and breach of confidentiality.

Under the Bill, central and state governments are obliged to provide for anti-retroviral therapy (ART) and management of opportunistic infections (infections that take advantage of weakness in the immune system and occur frequently).

The protection mandated in the Bill extends to the fields of employment, healthcare services, educational services, public facilities, property rights, holding public office, and insurance.

Though the Bill was initially introduced in the Parliament by the UPA government, the amendments to the HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Bill, 2014 were revived by the Modi government in July last year.

Since then the health ministry has made various changes to the original Bill to address several concerns raised by the HIV community as well as state governments.
For instance, the Bill now makes anti-retroviral treatment a legal right for all HIV/AIDS patients. It has also adopted “test and treat” policy which means any person testing positive will be entitled for free treatment by the state and central government. Earlier, this was restricted by a CD4 count rate.

It also provides for confidentiality of HIV-related information and makes it necessary to get informed consent for undertaking HIV tests, medical treatment and research. The Bill, moved by health minister J P Nadda, was passed in the Upper House by a voice vote.

During the debate on the measure, many members suggested amending the Section 14(1) of the bill, to remove the phrase “as far as possible” for providing medical treatment by the Centre and the states to those infected with HIV and AIDS.

In his reply to the debate, Nadda said “I would like to inform the House that while making the rules, we will ensure that nobody is denied treatment and we are committed to provide medical treatment to all those living with HIV or AIDS. We are going with an aggressive policy.”

However, civil society organisations raised concerns against the “as far as possible” clause and said this will “dilute” the provision and allow state governments to deny treatment to many patients.

Stessing the government's commitment to the issue, the Nadda said “India will treat anyone with HIV and AIDS.”

He added the rules will have provision to provide justification for denying treatment to the patients.

A large number of members were of the view that the phrase 'as far possible’ would defeat the purpose of the bill as it provides a leeway to the Centre and the states.

The section says: “The measures to be taken by the Central or State Governments under Section 13 shall include measures for providing as far as possible, anti-retroviral therapy and opportunistic management to people living with HIV or AIDS.”

On the members concern over insufficient allocation for National AIDS Control Programme, Nadda said Rs 2,000 crore has been allocated for this year and there is no question of reducing funds for this central scheme.

Congress member Jairam Ramesh had said during the debate that the government has provided Rs 2,000 crore for the scheme for 2017-18 which should be raised to higher levels.

On the issue of infection from blood sourced from various blood banks, Nadda said the government is giving special attention to this issue and the number of such cases have come down drastically.

The Bill also provides for fast tracking of cases relating to HIV positive persons by courts on a priority basis. In any legal proceeding, if an HIV infected or affected person is a party, the court may pass orders that the proceedings be conducted (a) by suppressing the identity of the person, (b) in camera, and (c) to restrain any person from publishing information that discloses the identity of the applicant. When passing any order with regard to a maintenance application filed by an HIV infected or affected person, the court shall take into account the medical expenses incurred by the applicant.

