{"datetime": "2017-10-10T03:19:16+05:30"}
MUMBAI: Several blood banks in the city may be faltering in one of their basic, yet crucial, responsibilities, which is to refer donors to HIV/AIDS clinics if they are found to be infected with the virus.

It was recently found that while 489 units of blood were found to be HIV positive in 2016-17, only 230 donors were subsequently referred to the Integrated Counselling and Testing Centres (ICTC).

Failure of blood banks to link HIV-infected patients with ICTC centres—where the infection is confirmed and further management of the disease facilitated— could not just lead to the individual going without antiretroviral therapy, but also infecting others inadvertently.

At a review meeting held by the Mumbai District Aids Control Society (MDACS) in July, the findings were discussed with blood banks, who have now been asked to be more diligent in linking donors.

HIV positivity in the city in 2016-17 was found to be 0.3%, which is lower than the national average of 0.136%. While the overall HIV positivity in blood units collected in the city has been decreasing, it seems that the infection rate at the National AIDS Control Organisation-supported blood banks has remained stagnant for the last four years. An average of 480 units of HIV-infected blood is detected every year. Interestingly, HIV positivity in non-NACO blood banks has been showing a steady decrease.

A third of the 61 blood banks in Mumbai are supported by NACO and most of these are in public hospitals. 

Dr Shrikala Acharya, assistant project director of MDACS, said as per National Blood Transfusion Council (NBTC) guidelines blood banks should collect information about donors in case they need to be contacted for counselling or treatment in the event of their reports indicating positive for an infection. “It’s a part of the pre-donor counselling that is supposed to be done before blood collection. It is not mandatory, but it is a part of the guidelines,” she said.

Acharya added, “Often blood units are collected through camps, where a person may or may not have given his contact details. This is why we are strengthening referral systems.”

