{"datetime": "2018-06-19T09:27:41+05:30"}
HYDERABAD: Advising patients to watch out for periodic episodes of pain, called ‘crises’, doctors say these are a major symptom of sickle cell anaemia. Other warning signs include fatigue, fever and unexplained swelling, they said while speaking on the occasion of World Sickle Cell Day.





Doctors say sickle cell anaemia, caused by a mutation in the haemoglobin-Beta gene, can bring with it a host of consequences from strokes and organ damage to vision problems and eventual blindness. Awareness needs to be created about the disease to bring down morbidity rates associated with it in the city, say doctors.

“A fatal stroke can occur if sickle cells block blood flow to an area of your brain. Sickle cell anaemia can also cause life-threatening complications like acute chest syndrome, pulmonary hypertension, organ damage, leg ulcers and gallstones. Sickle cells can also block the tiny blood vessel that are connected to one’s eyes. Over time, this can damage the retina and lead to blindness,” warned Dr Sonali Ashok Sadawarte, consultant haemato-oncologist and bone marrow transplant physician at KIMS Hospitals in Secunderabad.

Doctors also point out how patients suffering from sickle cell anaemia often require recurring blood transfusions, making them at risk of contracting diseases such as HIV, Hepatitis B and C and Malaria, from unscreened blood.

“There is an urgent need to create awareness on the disease and the prevention measures given that the only cure is bone marrow transplantation, in cases where the patient has managed to find a matching donor. Hence tests like carrier screening, new born screening and pre-natal diagnosis, which help in early diagnosis and prevention, should be made accessible. It is also very important to provide genetic counselling to patients before even offering them any advice to enable them to understand the disease, implications and management,” said Dr Rahul Agarwal, consultant, internal medicine at MaxCure Hospitals in Madhapur.

