{"datetime": "2017-08-08T03:09:02+05:30"}
KOLKATA: State board students up to Class X, who stay with HIV-positive parents or carry the virus themselves, will now be classified as “belonging to (a) disadvantaged group”, which will make them eligible for all facilities that students belonging to Scheduled Castes or Tribes get under the Right to Education Act.

Students belonging to “disadvantaged groups” get a host of benefits, including reserved seats in institutions as well as grants, scholarships and hostel facilities.

The state government recently issued the notification to all heads of schools, affiliated to the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education, asking them to pass on the benefits of “disadvantaged group” students to HIV-positive parents’ children and HIV-positive children. 

Bengal joins other states, like Kerala, Puducherry, Goa, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, in following a Supreme Court directive asking state governments to consider issuing such a notification.

“The change of rules will ensure these students get the same facilities that SC, ST students and those classified under minority groups get under the provisions of the RTE Act, 2009. They will get government grants, reservation, scholarships and hostel facilities like the other disadvantaged students. The notification has already been sent to all WBBSE schools,” a senior school education department official said.

The SC order came after a Delhi-based NGO, working with HIV/AIDS patients, submitted that children living with HIV-positive parents or affected by HIV were suffering segregation and, in many cases, were being compelled to leave school even though there was zero risk of transmission of the disease. The apex court then asked state governments to consider issuing this notification.

“We got some cases, mainly from Howrah, South 24-Parganas and Murshidababd, where schools were under pressure from guardians of other students to ostracise HIV-positive students,” an official said.

A recent National Aids Control Organisation report says nearly 22,000 children in Bengal (out of the 1.45 lakh under-15 population) are suffering from HIV. “This number is huge and increasing. The government’s concern for these students will help them,” Subhashgram Nabatara Vidyalaya headmaster Anupam Roy said.


