{"datetime": "2018-09-26T03:03:40+05:30"}
MUMBAI: Social science institutes don't attract funding easily, be it from the government or the corporate sector, said professor Shalini Bharat, who officially took over as TISS director on Tuesday. "People are investing in research park, innovation cells, but we don't see any funding coming our way...We do not even have enough seed funding to work on our ideas," she said. 


Bharat, who was the deputy director (academics) at TISS, was holding additional charge as the director for over six months, after S Parasuraman retired in February. 

Speaking about the challenges faced by the premier institute, Bharat said the financial situation is not so good and they would need support from various sources. "We are reaching out to people. It is matter of converting all the good wishes to actual funds. Many have shown interest and we are getting money, but it is nowhere close to what we need." The shortage of funds in social sciences' sector paints a worrying picture for institutes like TISS. 

TISS had competed for the Institutes of Eminence tag from the MHRD but lost out to other institutes despite having the highest NAAC rating in the country. It was granted grade-I autonomy status recently. 

"The challenge now is to consolidate what we already have and do quality research, and work with communities and disadvantaged groups... More importantly, we want to evaluate the impact of our work. We will have to see what more needs to be done and how," Bharat said. 

Though physical expansion of the campus is not on cards, she intends to start courses where there is a possibility of revenue generation. "People are keen to have a degree from TISS. We will have to acc- ordingly design courses based on the need of the industry." 

The new director is keen on bringing some stability across their campuses. "Students have raised a few issues in the recent past, which are importa- nt. There have been some problems (referring to the recent protests over scholarships) but we have commenced work to augment our endowments and to get more scholarships and more fellowships for them. There is a shortage, but we are trying to raise funds and support many more students. It may not exactly match their demands, but we are making a sincere effort," said Bharat. 

For the last two years, UGC has been hinting at the closure of few centres, including the ones working on social exclusion and inclusive policies, women's studies and human rights. "We are constantly in dialogue with the UGC and we are hoping for a positive outcome," she said. From research point of view, she said she would continue to work on her projects in the health sector, like studying the impact of counselling on health systems and self-testing for HIV. 


