{"datetime": "2017-12-01T01:14:54+05:30"}
MUMBAI: Following years of protest, the Centre is set to roll out the viral load-testing for HIV/AIDS patients in the next six months across the country. The test essentially tells whether the treatment regimen is working or not by measuring the amount of HIV virus in a patient’s blood.

The National Aids Control Organisation (NACO) has already shortlisted laboratories across the country that would be scaled up to carry out the tests. However, it may be a while before every patient on antiretroviral therapy (ART) qualifies to undergo the expensive test, which costs between Rs 6,000 and Rs 8,000 in a private laboratory.

In 2013, the WHO had recommended the viral load-test be carried out within six months of starting an individual on ART and be repeated at the end of that year. Subsequently, it should be carried out annually. People living with HIV and NGOs have since been fighting for the test to be made routinely available and more accessible.




“From February onward, 532 ART centres across the country will have the viral load-testing facility. In the initial phases, it will be offered to children below the age of five years, people taking treatment for five years and those suffering from HIV-TB co-infection. They have been chosen keeping the criticality of their condition in mind. The test will subsequently be available to all 1.2 million people on ART treatment in the country,” said Dr R S Gupta of NACO’s Care, Support and Treatment division. The civic-run KEM and Nair hospitals are likely to be the centres in the city.

Currently, the test is selectively offered at the state-run JJ Hospital, where patients have to go through the stringent scrutiny of a committee.

“The body takes between four and six months only to decide who will undergo the test. It’s unfortunate that in the absence of a viral load-test, the programme solely relies on CD4 count,” said Ganesh Acharya, a member of the Mumbai Aids Forum (MAF). CD4 is an indicator of the body’s immune system. “But it’s only part information about what the virus is doing with the immune system. A high viral load in the body will usually, but not always, mean a low CD4 count,” said infectious disease expert Dr Om Srivastava, who recommends viral load-testing every six months to one year.

“Because of the unavailability of the test, patients also often don’t realize when they have become resistant to the first line or second line drugs,” said Poonam Patkar, secretary of MAF.

Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) India that offers viral load-testing to KEM patients as a special model, run in collaboration with the Mumbai District Aids Control Society (MDACS), said they have got great results in picking treatment failures early and improving outcomes by addressing non-adherence in patients. The MSF data collated from KEM has shown that 90% of the patients were responding to the treatment offered under the national programme as their viral loads were suppressed.


