{"datetime": "2017-09-13T08:59:09+05:30"}
CHENNAI: The good: Tamil Nadu has halted and reversed the HIV/AIDS epidemic after being on the high prevalence map for seven years. The bad: More people living with the infection are dying now compared to previous years.

Statistics sourced by TOI shows that 4,397 people infected with HIV died in 2016. While from 2009 to 2013, the average number of deaths every year has stood at around 2,192, from 2014 onwards, this has gone up to 3,744 – a 70% jump. The figures were shared by Tamil Nadu State AIDS Control Society (TANSACS) after officials initially refused to share data to an RTI query on HIV-related deaths stating that the information is “highly sensitive”.

While a section of officials attributed the increase to death of people who form the “backlog group” – those diagnosed as being HIV positive 10-15 years ago, another section said there has also been a substantial rise in the number of people reporting at an advanced stage, resulting in poor treatment outcome.

A senior TANSACS official said the department did not have specifics on the cause of death among those infected with the virus. “Most of the time, the antiretroviral therapy centres get to know about the death of patients through outreach workers or other positive patients,” he said, adding the data available also included those who had died of reasons that were not directly linked to HIV, like suicide and accidents. 

TANSACS field officers say at least 60% of the deaths were because of opportunistic infections like tuberculosis – the biggest killer, followed by meningitis, pneumonia or diarrhea owing to lowered immunity level caused by HIV. “We need general physicians at ART centers to test for these infections. We lose at least 20% of our patients as they go directly to hospitals. They often don’t return to the ART centers after that,” said a field officer in Salem, among the high-risk districts. At present, ART medical officers only provide ART drugs and monitor the CD4 count – an important laboratory indicator of the immune function and the strongest predictor of HIV progression. 

According to the last India HIV Estimation report compiled by the National AIDS Control Organisation, Tamil Nadu has 1.43 lakh people living with HIV as on 2015. The number of new cases being detected have gone down over the years from 25,572 in 2009 to 11,345 in 2016. 

Another field officer in Trichy said almost 70% of the cases that come to the ART clinic at an advanced stages with a CD4 count of less than 250. “Late detection has always been a problem as AIDS is asymptomatic. People can live for 7-10 years without any symptoms. But we are seeing a marginal increase in these people,” he said, adding it could be because of the decline in awareness programmes. If detected late, death usually happens in the first six months since initiation of ART. The mortality rate, he said, is higher among males, aged 18 and above, among illiterates, and those residing in rural areas.

Another section of officials said most of the deaths are among those diagnosed with AIDS a decade ago. “In early 2000 the average survival rate of those infected was around five years, but with the advancement of drugs and better intervention it is around 10-15 years. Those people who were diagnosed back then could be dying now,” said an official from Vellore, adding that the death would decline too with lesser new infections.

Dr R R Gangakhedkar, direct-in charge of National AIDS Research Institute said the death rate was significantly high even if this included the ageing cohort. “This calls for further investigation to see if this increase is across the duration of antiretroviral therapy,” said Dr Gangakhedkar, adding that he also found it surprising that people were reporting with lower CD4 counts as the national average of the count among patients reporting in ART centers is on the rise. 

Some experts TOI spoke to also pointed out the discrepancy in numbers. “NACO report shows a 60% decrease in HIV-related deaths. The numbers keep differing in various platforms – it shows poor surveillance and data-keeping,” said Vijay Raman from Voluntary Health Services who undertake projects related to HIV/AIDS among the transgender community.

Activists have also pinned the trend to lesser awareness programmes with many international donors pulling out of the state and the Centre cutting funds.

