{"datetime": "2018-07-26T07:27:03+05:30"}
BENGALURU: Aishwarya (name changed) was a sex worker living on the edge of penury. She, however, didn’t become a victim of HIV. Fighting stigma, she groomed her self-confidence and started saving for her sons’ education. Today, her elder son, an MTech holder, works in Hyderabad, while her younger son is pursuing undergraduate engineering.

Like Aishwarya, thousands of sex workers and sexual minorities have successfully kept HIV at bay and changed their lives drastically, thanks to project Avahan. The initiative focuses on integrating biological and behavioural aspects of target groups and empowering them with peer education.

Avahan has been described as a “sterling example” in the recent report released by the joint UN Agency on AIDS (UNAIDS). Between 2003-12, the project, funded by Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and University of Manitoba in Canada, reached out to 65,000 sex workers and over 25,000 sexual minorities. As per a survey, the findings of which were reported in British Medical Journal, the prevalence of HIV in Karnataka reduced from 19.6% to 10.8% and of syphilis (another sexually transmitted disease) from 5.9% to 2.4%, with the increased use of condoms. Avahan, which targeted 16 districts of Karnataka, was credited for the achievement.

“We got an identity. We ensured that we protected ourselves even while in the job. I am now into counselling and am leading a better life. I was able to save money for my children’s education,” said Aishwarya, who is no longer in sex work. 

What made Avahan a successful model was that it never took a moral and judgemental view, says H L Mohan, managing trustee, Karnataka Health Promotion Trust (KHPT), who spearheaded the project. 

According to a Lancet report, Avahan prevented no less than six lakh HIV cases in India. Karnataka was one of the six states chosen for the project, and here, it was executed by KHPT from 2003 to 2012. 

The programme not only brought in mandatory condom usage but also worked for the community members’ empowerment. Clinics were set up where members went for fortnightly tests. The project also helped them save money in cooperative societies run by themselves. Drop-in centres were established at the hotspots, where sex workers could walk in at any time to relax, watch TV and consult doctors. In Bengaluru, the centres were set up in Yeshwantpur, Shivajinagar and Malleswaram and were functional 24/7.

With every fortnightly visit, members of the vulnerable section understood the complexity of the situation they were in. “We set up cooperative societies run by sex workers, so that they can save money and don’t have to borrow from money lenders. We have even saved many young girls from being trafficked,” said Mohan.

In 2013, when the project ended, the centres were subsumed with the government. “Avahan should have been an ongoing project to make the state HIV-free,” added Mohan. Even now, KHPT gets visitors from abroad who come to study the model that led to HIV prevention.

No mean feat

To win the confidence of sex workers and work with them in risk-reduction interventions wasn’t easy to begin with. Usage of condoms alone wouldn’t have worked unless we reduced their vulnerability. We had to closely work with them to understand the strategy to safeguard them from infections. We did a hotspot mapping involving them. The strategy was different for each district. While home-based prostitution was seen more in districts like Shivamogga, street-based work was more prevalent in places like Davanagere, Ballari and Bengaluru

H L Mohan, managing trustee, KHPT


