{"datetime": "2017-12-01T00:01:16+05:30"}
THANE: Residents from Thane have been affected the most with the killer HIV virus. Out of 2,304 HIV positive patients in the district, around 33% were from Thane city, including Mira Road and Bhayander. This was stated in the 2016-17 report of Thane’s District AIDS Prevention and Control Unit (DAPCU). However, there has been a drop in the number of cases in the entire district.

The officials claimed that Thane city, comprising of Thane, Mira Road and Bhayander, had more people who belong to the high risk population. Navi Mumbai and Bhiwandi were among the top three places in the district that were detected with the most number of cases.

“These cities not only have a high population, but also have people from the high risk zone —like sex workers, migrants, transgenders, truck drivers, etc. It was also seen that out of the ones who were detected positive, 80% got infected due to unsafe sex. While others got it through blood transfusion. Though 110 pregnant women were detected HIV positive in 2016-17, the number has decreased as compared to the 2015-16 figures that stood at 153 women affected with the virus. This drop is because of the awareness drives being carried out by various organisations,” said Ratan Gadhave, district programme officer of theDAPCU.

The department, along with 33 NGOs, conduct awareness drives on regular basis and focus more on the people belonging to the high risk communities.

“Out of those who fall under the high risk category, the highest number of people tested positive were migrant workers and and truck drivers. But there has been a rise in the number of patients taking the HIV test. This is because of the awareness drives we have been carrying out in these pockets. During these drives, we request those infected with the virus to come to the anti-retroviral therapy (ART) centre for tests,” said Gadhave.

However, there has been a drop in HIV positive cases in the district. This is an indication that the awareness drives and sensitization programmes organized by the state authorities and voluntary groups in the last seven years has shown positive results. While there were 5,154 HIV cases in 2010-11, the numbers came down to around 2,304 in 2016-2017. 


