{"datetime": "2017-12-01T00:10:07+05:30"}
Nashik: Her in-laws threw her out when Anita’s husband died of AIDS and she was diagnosed with HIV positive ten years ago. Her parents, who lived in the tribal belt of Warora tehsil in Chandrapur district also did not allow her to stay with them. But, Anita (name changed) was lucky to find shelter at Yash Foundation’s rehabilitation centre in Nashik.

 “I have been here for eight-nine years. As I earn now, my family is ready to welcome me. But, I rarely visit them. The centre is my home now,” she says.

The centre run by the Yash Foundation in Nashik near Gangapur Naka, has nine women residents busy in stitching handbags and gloves. During Diwali, they make lanterns and earthen lamps. As the new academic and financial years begin, they take orders to make stationary for offices. Throughout the year, these engage themselves in various activities to earn their living. 

Many of them support their families too. The centre has trained 56 HIV positive women in various skills. Many of them completed their education from the Yashwantrao Chavan Maharashtra Open University. Several got jobs in various companies, schools, government departments, or started started their own small-scale business. Former residents often visit the rehabilitation centre for the same reason.

“They can share their experiences, feelings, health issues with us,” a former resident of the centre says. 

Funded through the corporate social responsibility activities of Mahindra and Mahindra Ltd in Nashik, the centre is supported by a young team of the foundation. 

Ravindra Patil, head of Yash Foundation, says lack of awareness is responsible for the alienation of HIV positive people. “Often families throw them out and villagers order them out of their area just because people are not aware about AIDS and HIV. Its difficult to convince people in Nashik, Pune and Mumbai to buy the bags and gloves made by the HIV positive women.” 

“People think twice before buying the products made by these women. We can’t even think of entering the food-processing industry as it will be impossible to convince people to buy products made by HIV positive women,” Patil said.

“Instead of participating in AIDS awareness rally for one day on December 1, it would be better if people accept us as a part of society. We don’t enjoy being treated as special people,” Anita says.


