{"datetime": "2018-08-06T10:57:29+05:30"}
LUDHIANA: Member of Parliament from Ludhiana Ravneet Singh Bittu on Sunday claimed that the anti-drugs campaign of Punjab government is bearing fruit, and people especially of rural areas are now getting more aware about this social evil which had destroyed the future of Punjab. The MP’s comments came a day after he visited Madarpura village in Ludhiana district, where he met 38 former drug addicts, who — according to Bittu — have quit drugs after a government campaign.


Giving more information about the former drug addicts, Bittu said: “The Congress government is very serious about fighting the drug menace in the state, and we are constantly making all possible efforts to uproot this problem from Punjab. Our efforts have started showing results, and the latest example is of 38 youth from several villages of Ludhiana who have shunned drugs and are now leading a normal life. Some of them have even started working hard and are doing jobs, which has given a new lease of life for their families.”

Bittu visited the families of some of the former drug addicts at Madarpura village of the district on Saturday. The family members of these former addicts thanked Bittu for his efforts. Bittu said one such former addict declared in front of the village that he never woke up before 10am when he was into drugs, and hardly did any work then, but now that he has shunned drugs, he has started working as a driver for a vegetable seller. “Now I wake up at 4am daily, go to the nearby vegetable mandi, and am happy to lead a normal life,” an elated Hardeep told the village gathering.

The MP said another former drug addict Simranpreet Singh told them he felt so relaxed now, and wanted to emerge as an example for other youth to shun drugs, which he said was not a difficult task, provided one is steadfast. His octogenarian grandmother Naseeb Kaur also thanked the MP and said with her grandson shunning drugs, a few more years were added to her life.

A district public relations office (DPRO) statement said sometime back, 38 youth from villages such as Jangpur, Dakha, Mullanpur, Swaddi, Madarpura, Salempur, Tibba, Abbupura, Malsian, and others, were admitted at a drug de-addiction centre. Bittu informed that these boys stayed at the drug de-addiction centre for a few days, and were now leading a normal, healthy life. He said the treatment provided to them by the government was totally free of cost.

Bittu also lauded the efforts of Manjinder Singh Khaira, a resident of village Abbupura, who has adopted five such youths, ensuring they not only shun drugs, but also stay away from them forever. He informed that youth suffering from AIDS or Hepatitis C would be provided free-of-cost treatment by the state government.

Later, addressing a rally at Kular village, Bittu urged everyone to stay away from drugs, and said all people should join this war against drugs. He said people should adopt drug addicts from their villages and take them to nearby drug de-addiction centres for treatment. He also warned drug smugglers to mend their ways, or face strict action.

He also said the war against drugs would soon be won, as addicts themselves were coming forward to shun them. He assured all such youth that the Punjab government would see to it that they joined the mainstream and are provided employment. He added if any person wanted help in quitting drugs, they could contact his office anytime. 


