{"datetime": "2018-09-04T04:05:06+05:30"}
GURUGRAM: Next time when you are driving on the Delhi-Gurugram Expressway, be extra cautious when you reach Narsinghpur— one of the most dangerous crash-prone stretches — as your car could plough into pedestrians crossing the road. The village, which is located on either side of the NH-8, has seen the highest number of fatal accidents in the district over the past several years, mostly involving people crossing the highway.

On Sunday evening, one more pedestrian died after being hit by a speeding car while crossing the median at Narsinghpur. According to the FIR filed at the Sector 37 police station, he was trying to climb the median grille in a bid to cross to the other flank of the road when the car hit him. The pedestrian was thrown into the air before landing a few metres away and died on the spot, police said.

Though official figures put the number of accidents along the highway in Narsinghpur to six in 2016 and eight the year before, the villagers say not less than 40-50 people fall prey to hit-and-run accidents every year. Narsinghpur houses predominantly members of the Gujjar community and a significant population of migrant labourers from Bengal and Bihar.

Sanjiv Bedi, a resident of Narsinghpur, said, “Authorities have failed to stop two-wheelers from taking the foot-over bridge (FoB). Owing to this, pedestrians find it tough to use the footbridge. Immediate measures should be taken so that the FoB is reserved only for pedestrians and not motorists.”

The NHAI, when contacted, has said maintenance of the expressway is the responsibility of Millennium City Expressway Private Limited (MCEPL), the concessionaire. Moreover, pedestrians are not allowed to cross the expressway, and will have to take the FoB) to cross the road.

Ashok Sharma, project director, NHAI (Gurgaon), said, “One can cross the expressway only by using FoBs or pedestarian underpasses. Median grilles have been installed to prevent pedestrians from crossing the road. This is an enforcement problem. This has to be prevented by MCEPL with or without the help of the police. People need to follow the rules to avert these accidents.”

MCEPL is responsible for upkeep of roads, street lights, drains and CCTV cameras from Delhi Cantonment area till Kherki-Daula, according to the concessionaire. “We’re doing our work properly,” said MCEPL CEO S Raghuraman.

Col Subhash Yadav, general manager, Skylark Securitas Pvt Ltd, the toll operator that has been given the responsibility of the entire stretch, said, “We have ensured that all medians are closed. It is the responsibility of pedestrians not to use the highway. On a highway, vehicles go at a high speed. NHAI has built a FoB why don’t the people use it?”

Last month, the entire stretch has seen only one accident, which was also not fatal.

People cross the highway by breaching the rules to reach hospitals, schools, ATMs and post office, and t avail other utilities. “Yes, the entire stretch has four points where pedestrians breach the median. Time and again, we have put barbed wires and repaired them too. However, pedestrians cut these wires to cross over to Narsinghpur,” Yadav said.

Experts suggested that new alternative methods should be enforced to prevent pedestrian deaths. Professor Sewa Ram of the School of Planning and Architecture (SPA) said the authorities concerned should set up level-crossings if people were not willing to use the FoB. “Level-crossings should be set up at busy intersections. These are road crossings, and most of them have traffic signals and either barriers or gates, which shut the road when cars are approaching. This system can have alarms also to warn pedestrians on approaching vehicles,” said Sewa Ram.


