{"datetime": "2017-12-11T13:19:33+05:30"}
When Savitha’s* husband returned at four in the morning, the scent of a woman on him roused her suspicion. The 36-year-old mother of two dug into his bag to find a sari, a lipstick and wilted flowers. Her husband, she later found, was a bisexual cross-dresser. 

Four years on, Savitha remains married to the same man. Her voice — narrating her husband’s affairs with other men — is among those documented by researchers who studied HIV-related risks among married men who have sex with men (MSM) and their wives. 

According to a 2012 study by National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO), MSM are at 12 to15 times higher risk of contracting HIV compared to other men. The recent study found that the HIV-related risks for the spouses of MSM were multiple, yet they are not covered under any intervention programmes of the government. 

Forty six MSMs were interviewed across five states including the cities of Chennai and Madurai. Of these, 13 women were aware of their husbands’ sexual orientation. Men in these marriages were the primary decision-makers about sex and condom use.

"The men used condoms inconsistently with their male partners," said Sunil Solomon of Y R Gaitonde Centre for AIDS Research and Education, a co-author of the study. "The women in these relationships are vulnerable but rarely feature in the country’s HIV intervention programmes. The initiatives mostly address the experiences and perspectives of husbands and their male partners, but not their wives," said Solomon, who facilitated the interviews for two teams from Johns Hopkins School of Medicine and Durham University. 




The few women who were interviewed said they came to know about their husbands’ same-sex preference by accident. The men in the study reported having multiple male, and a few female, extramarital sexual partners.

Forty-year-old Vasanth* from Hyderabad, who blamed his family for forcing him to marry, was among those who had not disclosed their orientation to their wives. "If I tell my wife about my relationship with men, she may harm herself. What will happen if she tells our families? I may be making a mistake, but I cannot trouble her. So my relationship remains a secret," he said. 

The study pointed to the high-risk sexual behaviour among MSM and a higher prevalence of HIV among married MSM than unmarried ones. The pressure on them to conform to heteronormative masculine norms leads to hurried and unsafe sex with multiple partners. 

Many MSMs are also victims of blackmail. "Their male partners threaten to expose them to their wives if they don’t listen to their demands. In the process, they end up having sex without protection," said Jaya, general manager of Sahodaran, which operates a helpline for the LGBT community in Chennai. 

Some of the couples surveyed for the study had separated after the women got to know about their husbands’ sexual preferences, while some remained married but no longer had a sex. However, a majority of participants continued to have sex both with their wives and partners. A few of them said they encouraged their wives to have extramarital relationships as they were not attracted to them. Women said they remain in these marriages due to cultural and economic pressures, and some for their children.

Some women, described pressure from their husbands to have anal sex against their wishes. "Accounts from both husbands and wives in our study indicate that husbands are the primary sexual decision-makers; some men clearly consider it a right. The men interviewed said they did not feel that using condom with their wives was "necessary", even when they had unsafe sex with other partners. ‘I have a medical check-up every three months, so what is the need to use condom with my wife?’ asked a 27-year-old bisexual man in Madurai. Condoms were only seen as a birth control measure and not to prevent sexually transmitted diseases," said Solomon. "But, several participants we interviewed were actively seeking a pregnancy at the time of the interview, and consequently avoided using condoms with their wives," he added. 

The study said there is an urgent need for interventions to address HIV-related risk posed to wives without the unwanted disclosure of husbands’ same-sex behaviour. "For instance, engagement of these husbands in pre-exposure prophylaxis (taking HIV medicines daily to lower chances of getting infected) could reduce the men’s own risk of HIV, and thereby also reduce the risk of onward transmission to their wives." Researchers also suggested forming more support groups for these women.

(* Names have been changed)


