{"datetime": "2018-07-13T10:01:07+05:30"}
TRICHY: Thursday’s incident of a 20-year-old man on the verge of losing his right arm owing to an infection caused by the illegal use of an analgesic was only the tip of the iceberg on the rampant use of pain relievers among the youth in Trichy to get a high.


Despite the easy availability of liquor at state-run Tasmac shops and private bars, the craze for pain relievers and cough syrups is on the rise among several people particularly youth, school and college students.

"Such people, craving for finest high that liquor cannot give, go for drugs. A single gulp of a full bottle of syrup will make them feel flying. Likewise, the drugs injected also will keep them in a sedated state for a long time," said consultant neuro-psychiatrist Dr K Ramakrishnan of Athma Hospitals in Trichy. He said that the habit would lead to sudden death or suicide in the long run as rehabilitation could not be possible for chronic patients.

The recent case was of the use of Tapentadol by four people. Not only Tapentadol but also several other schedule ‘H’ drugs are being misused by people who want to get high. Cough syrups such as Phensydyl, pentazocine, surgical sprit, aspirin tablet, alprazolam and few other drugs are also used for the purpose. Such persons won’t be bothered about using the same needle among several people in a group to inject the drug. They are prone to infections including HIV.

The enquiry by ToI with police and doctors revealed that the increasing incidence of youths getting addicted to prescription drugs have become a serious issue in the city. Drug addicts and alcoholics from the district and neighbouring districts frequent deaddiction centres in Trichy.

Recently, Thillai Nagar police in Trichy reprimanded an 18-year-old boy for administering himself drugs. Depression, job stress, failure in life were said to be the reasons behind people turning to this habit. Those who underwent surgeries were also prone to drug addiction as they have already experienced the comfort of pain relievers.

On the other hand, former assistant director of drugs control, Trichy zone K Chandrasekaran pointed out the rampant violation in the sale of such drugs. "The over the counter sale at medical shops, unqualified staff at pharmacies, and lending pharmacy certificates to the medical shops should be curbed. Law enforcement by the drug control department should be tightened," said Chandrasekaran.

Trichy chapter of The Tamil Nadu Chemists and Druggists Association (TNCDA) expressed its displeasure over the violation of some of the medical shop owners. "We keep insisting on the sale of drugs on prescription only. Most of our people comply with the rules," said its district president K Manoharan on Thursday. He also underlined the trend of creating fake prescriptions to get certain drugs from the pharmacies to get high.


